60For Free Distribution

Using maps

At present, the maps have become a compulsory tool in day to day activities. Sri Lanka Atlas Book printed by the Survey Department of Sri Lanka is one example for a map book in current usage.

The skills of identifying basic features like,

²² Different types of maps²² Direction.²² Scale.²² Key ²² Map Index

and the skill of using a map book correctly can be received by

referring to an atlas.

5

The main objective of this chapter is to givprovide basic knowledge about using a map book accurately and productively.

Different Types of Maps

Different types of maps are included in an atlas. Following maps in “Sri Lanka Sithiyam Sangrahaya” (Sri Lanka atlas book), can be shown as examples

²² Relief and drainage map on page 11 ²² Topographic map on page 13.

When we study geography, we have to study a lot of information about the world. For that, it is necessary to refer to maps prepared under different themes. In an Atlas, maps are included under different themes.

Activity1. Name other map books in use.

61For Free Distribution

Direction.

Showing the direction on any map is compulsory. But figure of direction is not shown on some maps in map books. On such occasions, the direction where the heading of the map is shown is considered as North and other directions are determined accordingly. A map can be oriented accurately when the directions of the map are set correctly to the corresponding directions of the mapped area. Accordingly, from the place where you stay, the directions of the places marked on the map can be identified correctly.

Scale.

It is impossible to draw all the things found on the land at the same size on the map. In map books scale of each map is given.According to the scale, the size of the map too is changed. The differences among the scales could be understood further when the scale of wall map in the school and the scales found in map books are compared. According to the need, the map drawn may be large or small.

Activity

1. Prepare a table including different types of maps with page number

which can be found in a map book you use.

Activity1. Write scales found in different pages in the Atlas book you use.

The topographic map of Sri Lanka drawn by the Survey Department of Sri Lanka is drawn to the scale of 1: 50 000

representing 50 000 cm on land by 1 cm on map.

62For Free Distribution

Map 5.1

N

Key

The key too is compulsory to read maps. Every piece of information represented on the map is shown in the key by conventional signs. Identify how the key is helpful to read a map by observing the following map.

63For Free Distribution

Activities.The following questions are given based on Map 5.1. Answer them1. Draw the signs and write the relevant information connected to

them in your exercise book after observing the Map 5.1 and the key.2. What is the scale of this map?3. If you are in Kandy in which directions do you find Trincomalee,

Batticaloa and Colombo?4. Write the names of three Airports, Harbours and Wild life parks by

observing the map using the key.Index

An index compiled according to the alphabetical order is set in map books. It is helpful to find the location of a certain place. The relevant index to the road map of Sri Lanka shown on page no 104-109 in the book “Jathika Sithiyam Sangraya” (National Map Collection) is given on pages 110-114 in the same book. There is a grid on these maps and they are named by letters horizontally and by numbers vertically. Accordingly, the location of a place can be found by observing the gride of the map with reference to the letters and numbers in the index.

Activities.

1. Find and write the location of three places in Sri Lanka using the

index of the map book you use.

2. With reference to the index, write the numbers and squares

relevant to the city your school is located.Copying maps. Copying maps can be done in different ways. Methods of copying have developed with technology.

²² Copying by using tissue paper.²² Photo copying.²² Printing.

64For Free Distribution

You need

²² Map book

²² Tissue Papers/Other

transparent papers

²² Pencils

²² Paper pins or Paper

clips.

Figure 5.1 - How a map is copied.Step One.

²² Choose a model map of Sri Lanka either from Sri Lanka National

Maps Collection or another map book.²² Set the tissue paper on the map and draw the coast line.²² Set the tissue paper on the paper you need to copy the map, and

draw on that line again.²² Now remove on the tissue paper and draw the coast line of Sri

Lanka on traced line on paper.

Cleanliness and neatness are compulsory in copying maps.

²² Copying the border of a country can be done correctly through

this.

It is expected to give the skill of copying a map of Sri Lanka to a

paper from a model map of Sri Lanka.

Glossary

²² Using maps - is;shï mßyrKh -- @u\¨£h[PÎß £¯ß£õkPÒ²²Survey Department - ñkskafodare - {» AÍøÁ°¯À fomd¾;fïka;=j vønUÍ®²² Key - iQplh - SÔ±mk ÂÍUP®²²Direction - ÈYdj - vø\²²Index - iqÑh - ö£õxU SÔ±k²²Scale - mßudKh - AÍÄz vmh®²²Wall Map - ì;a;s is;shï - _Áºz ÷u\¨£h[PÒ²²Conventional signs - iïu; ixfla; - {¯©U SÔ±k²²Copying Maps - is;shï msg,ia - u\¨£h[PøÍ¨ lsÍu ¤µv£squÀ