==== BLOCKS ==== 

HISTORY

Grade 06

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2014Second Print - 2015Third Print - 2017Fourth Print - 2018Fifth Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved ISBN 978-955-25-0562-1

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted atSisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd,No. 110, Pagoda Road,Pitakotte.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaSundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana LankaDhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye mathaPiliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaOba we apa vidyaObamaya apa sathyaOba we apa shakthiApa hada thula bhakthiOba apa aloke Apage anupraneOba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba weNava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran mathaGnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mena jaya bhoomi karaEka mavakage daru kela bevinaYamu yamu vee nopamaPrema vada sema bheda dureradaNamo, Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

Foreword

With the continuous advancement of the world, the education sector too is transformed. Therefore, if we require the creation of a student community who could confront the future challenges successfully, our learning teaching process must constantly utilize effective approaches. It is our responsibility to disseminate the knowledge of the new world while assisting to create global citizens with good values. Our department is actively engaged in producing learning tools with the great aim of contributing to enlighten the minds of the children of the country.

A textbook is a repository of knowledge. At times, it takes us to a world of entertainment while developing our critical thinking faculties. It promotes our hidden potentials. In the coming years, the memories related to these textbooks will bring you happiness. While making the maximum use of this valuable learning tool, you must essentially access other useful knowledge spaces too. I wish that you would gain the ability to enlighten the future as citizens with knowledge and values by using this textbook.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the panels of writers, editors and reviewers as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department for the contribution made on this endeavor.

W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications DepartmentIsurupaya,Battaramulla.26.05.2020

v

Monitoring and Supervision - W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General Educational Publications Department

Direction - W. A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department Co-ordination - Ranjith Iluppitiya Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department - Indumini Darshika Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentPanel of Editors

1. Prof. Raj Somadewa - Postgraduate Institute of Archaeology

2. Prof. Rev. Hanguranketha Deerananda - Department of History University of Peradeniya

3. Prof. Padmasiri Kannangara - Department of History University of Sri Jayawardenepura

4. C. N. Dharmapala - Senior Lecturer National Insitute of Education

Panel of Writers

1. K. S. Ranjani - In-Service - Adviser Zonal Education Office, Horana

2. W. A. Indrani - Teacher Infant Jesus Convent, Ratnapura

3. Sister Mary Doneta - Retired Deputy Principal

vi

Translation - A. B. S. Aloka Bandara Master Trainer Language Editing - W. Indumini Darshika Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Illustrations - G. V. A. D. Perera Lecturer National Insitute of Education Cover Page and Page Layout - Charani Nishamini Alahakoon Educational Publications Department

Technical Assistance - Charani Nishamini Alahakoon Educational Publications Department W. Isuri Madushani Educational Publications Department

Anusha Wanninayake Educational Publications Department

vii

Contents

Page

Access for knowledge with joy and leisure

1.1 What Is History? 1 1.2 How to Study History 1 1.3 Benefits of Learning History 3 1.4 How Does History Measure Time? 4

1. Defining History

2.1 The Environment Where Man's Origin Took Place 7 2.2 The Evolution of Ancient Man 10 2.3 The Cultural Evolution of Man 13

2. Ancient Man

3.1 Origin of Civilizations 21 3.2 Expansion of Civilizations and Its Consequent Benefits to the World 22

3. Ancient Civilizations in the World

4.1 Early Settlements in Sri Lanka 31 4.2 The Arrival of King Vijaya and the Expansion of Settlements 34

4. Settlements in Sri Lanka

5.1 King Pandukabhaya 37 5.2 King Devanampiyathissa 39 5.3 King Dutugemunu 43 5.4 King Valagamba 46 5.5 King Vasabha 49 5.6 King Mahasen 52 5.7 King Dhathusena 55

5. Our Brave Kings

1

7

21

31

37

www.e-thaksalawa.moe.gov.lk

viii

Message from the Panel of Editors

The members of any society belong to a particular historical process. Therefore they and the culture they enjoy are historic. The sources of some of the socio political issues which we face at present can be found in our immediate past. By understanding them properly, we can understand the historical patterns. By understanding the present issues properly, the history helps us to gain the experiences needed to solve them. That is why we have to learn history. Understanding one's own identity properly is a necessary factor to live in the society as individuals and work towards a common goal with a group.

This textbook has been compiled from a horizon that is completely detached from the standard academic perspective. The nature of the history that should be learnt upto G.C.E. Ordinary Level Examination by a student of this country is focused here. In this textbook, it is attempted to complete the minimum knowledge that should be acquired about one's own historical heritage by a citizen who ends school education to join the society. Beyond that, the pathway is open to acquire deep academic knowledge about the history of this country and others for those who wish to continue university education through Advanced Level after passing the Ordinary Level Examination.

It is the expectation of the editors that this textbook compiled in a simple manner including a few themes found to be useful for the students to light up their historical thoughts, will help to strengthen the educational basis needed to mould a good citizen.

The Panel of Editors25th of May 2014At the Educational Publications Department

1

Introduction

At the end of this lesson, you will learn what history is, the importance of learning history and how to understand history which covers a long period of time.

1.1 What is History?

People have been living on this earth for quite a long time. During that time,

(a) They have lived in different parts of the world.(b) They have made their environment conducive for their living. (c) They have maintained relationships with each other.

The story that describes these past events is history. In short, history means studying and describing the details of the people who lived in the past.

PresentFuturePast

Fig. 1.1. Looking back at the past and learning what has happened belong to studying history.

1.2 How to Study History...

We did not exist thousand years ago.Therefore, we do not have any knowledge of what happened in the past. Pay your attention to what is given below.

(a) I haven’t seen my grandfather’s mother.(b) I haven’t seen how my school was built.(c) I do not know about the elders who served our village.

All of those events belong to the history of your life. Then, how do you know about them?

(a) My father has told me about the mother of my grandfather.(b) An article in our school magazine has described how my school was constructed.(c) Our principal sir told us about the elders who served our village, in the school assembly.

Defining History1

2

When you learn history, you may have questions such as these;

(a) What was the shape of the throne on which our kings had sat?

(b) What type of currency was used in our country in ancient times?

 Such a throne has been placed in the Colombo National Museum.

 We have seen many old coins kept in the museum.

You can realize what a throne is by seeing it with your own eyes. We are able to get some knowledge about coins by seeing them.

We learn history referring to books written in ancient times; if not, with the help of the remaining articles used by the people who lived in the past. In addition to these two ways, we can learn about history through stories about the past narrated by our elders. There is a common term used to introduce everything which helps us to study history; that is ‘a source’.

Fig. 1.2. Many things about history can be learnt from the elders.

There are two types of sources which are useful to study history.(a) Literary sources – (ancient written records such as old books and folktales)(b) Archaeological sources – (what is remaining now, which belonged to the past, such as old articles, building constructions and their ruins)

Examples:Human skeletons, various things left after being used by man for his food.

Some sources which are helpful to study the history of Sri Lanka

SourceTypeTime of composition / constructionAuthor

Deepawamsa Literary Source4th Century ADNot known

MahawamsaLiterary Source5th Century AD

Mahanama Thero of Diksanda Senewiya Pirive-na, which was affiliated to Mahawiharaya

Galvihara in PolonnaruwaArchaeologicalSource12th Century ADKing Parakramabahu I

3

What is a throne?

Activity 01

Fill in the grid given below with the names of the types of sources which help you to know the history of your school.

Literary Sources Archaeological Sources

1.3 Benefits of Learning History

You might think whether there is any use of learning about the things which occurred in the past. Though they belong to the past, we can use the message given by them to make our present better.

Let’s try to explain this fact with a simple example. One of the serious problems that we face today is the unfavourable environmental condition caused as a result of utilizing insecticides and chemical manure.

l

?

But in the past, Sri Lanka was known as the Granary of the East because of the successful methods practised in agriculture. There is not any evidence which tells us that there existed any environmental pollution that can be seen today.

A means to solve our present problem can be found by understanding how people were engaged in agriculture in an environmental friendly way in the past.

We need to look back at the history to understand how the things that we see and hear at present came into existence. For example, one day you may wonder how the scripts that you write today were formed. Perhaps one of your friends may ask you the same question. To understand the evolution of scripts, its history has to be studied. Writing scripts in Sri Lanka has a history of about 2,250 years. Accordingly, try to understand how the letter ‘l’ in Sinhala evolved into the present state as shown in fig. 1.3.

4

By gaining a good understanding of the successes and failures of our ancestors, we can have a guidance to solve the problems that we face today. Furthermore, the light of that knowledge guides us to have an understanding of how our future should be and how our country can be developed in the future.

Fig. 1.3 The way how the Sinhala letter ‘l’ evolved into its present form.

250 B.C.

250 A.D. 800 A.D.

1200 A.D.

Activity 02

Write an essay about the "History of Your School".

1.4 How Does History Measure Time?

History means a long period of time. It is important to measure it (time) accurately, when we study history. There are a few methods to measure the time of history in which many events had happened. The two methods used most frequently are;

(a). Before Christ (B.C.)

(b). Anno Domini (A.D.)

These two methods are based on the year of birth of Jesus Christ. Accordingly,

The time period before the birth of Jesus Christ is called ‘before Christ (B.C.)’,

The time period after the birth of Jesus Christ is known as ‘Anno Domini (A.D.).

Let’s get this clarified through an example; Arahat Mahinda Thero arrived in our country 250 years before the birth of Jesus Christ. Hence, it is considered that this event took place in 250 B.C. King Mahasen who constructed Minneriya tank, started reigning Sri Lanka, 274 years after the birth of Jesus Christ. Therefore, it is considered that his rule started in 274 A.D.

In addition to what has been mentioned above, Buddhist years and Saka years are sometimes used to show the time. These methods had been used in ancient India and Sri Lanka. You may have seen that these two types of methods are mentioned in almanacs in our houses. These two methods are used to calculate historical time on some occasions even today.

Buddhist years start since the day on which the demise (Maha Parinibbana) of the Lord Buddha took place. Although scholars hold different views of the year in which the demise of the Lord Buddha took place, the general belief is that it happened five hundred and forty four years before the birth of Jesus Christ, that was in 544 B.C.

5

The system of Saka years is a calendar of Hindus. It started in 78 A.D. The king Gauthamiputhra Sathakarni who ruled the Western India started Saka year system in memory of the victory gained over the areas of the Saka people.

There is a chronological method used by Muslims to calculate time in celebrating their religious festivals. It is called Hijri years. It started in 622 A.D. It was the year in which Prophet Mohammad, the leader of the Islam religion, arrived in the city of Madeena from Mecca.

easily, have deposited on these soil layers. More ancient things have deposited on the lowest layer of the soil while things belonging to the recent past are deposited on the higher layers of the soil.

Times in which a few historically important events took place according to the method of A.D. :-

Sri Lanka became an independent country - 1948 A.D.

In addition to these methods, there are a number of methods used in laboratories to calculate the ancient history of some hundred thousand years. Time can be calculated by digging the earth systematically too. This process is known as archaeological excavation. When the earth is excavated, soil layers under the earth could be seen. Various things, which belonged to the past and did not decay

The beginning of King Mahasen’s rule – 274 A.D.

The beginning of King Vasabha's rule – 67 A.D.

Birth of Jesus Christ – 1 A.D.

Demise ( Maha Parinibbana) of the Lord Buddha – 544 B.C.

Most of the things that existed in the past are now buried. Their ruins are still remaining in the soil layers of the earth. We can learn about history by digging the earth carefully.

6

Time in which a few historically important events took place according to the method of Buddhist Era :-

The beginning of King Mahasen’s rule – 818 Buddhist Era

The beginning of King Vasabha’s rule – 611 Buddhist Era

Birth (nativity) of Jesus Christ – 544 Buddhist Era

Demise (Maha Parinibbana) of Lord Buddha – 1 Buddhist Era

Activity 03

Write the events given below in A.D. and in Buddhist Era.

1. Your birthday 2. Current year

Important Points:

1). Everything that man did in the past belongs to the history.

2). What helps us to learn history is called a source. They are divided into two types named literary sources and archaeological sources.

3). Studying history will lead us to realize what is happening at present and what we should plan to do in the future.

4). There are methods to understand the time in which some events took place. The year system based on the birth of Jesus Christ (A.D.) and the year system based on the demise (Maha Parinibbana) of the Lord Buddha (Buddhist Era) are prominent among them.

7

Part I

2.1 The Environment Where Man's Origin Took PlaceOrigin of Earth and Life

The earth where we live is a planet. Its origin goes back to a past of four thousand five hundred and forty million years. Scientists hold different views on the formation of the earth. However, the common belief is that the earth was formed from a cloud of dust in the sky. Such a cloud of dust is known as a ‘nebula’. When the earth was formed, it was very warm. But gradually it became cool. However, the central part of the earth is still extremely hot. It has been calculated that its temperature is about 6,000 degrees of Celsius. Water boils at 100 degrees of Celsius. Now you can imagine the intensity of the temperature

Fig. 2.1. The earth was formed from a cloud of dust like this.

Introduction

Man lives on the earth. It is the world of every one of us. It is the home for man as well as for other animals and trees. The earth provides food and other necessities for all of us. All animals and vegetation living on earth are different from each other. These differences occurred due to the changes in the environment of various parts of the earth. The earth affected man, other animals and vegetation equally. Therefore, it is important for everyone of us to learn something about the earth on which we live. In this lesson you will learn about the formation of the earth and the origin of species on it.

Ancient Man2

8

in the inner part of the earth. When volcanoes erupt, the elements seething in the central part of the earth pour out. They are called 'lava'.

Species originated sometime after the formation of the earth. What first appeared on the earth with a life is a thing which could not be seen with the naked eye. It is known as ‘Prokaryote Bacteria’. This bacteria appeared on the earth two thousand and five hundred million years ago.

A fossilized mark of a creature, which lived five hundred and forty two million years ago, has been discovered in Canada. This creature is between 4 cm and 7 cm in length. It had lived in the sea bed. It had a mouth to eat and five eyes. It is known as ‘Opabinia’.

First species in the world originated in water. They came to the land sometime later. First, a type of creatures similar to millipedes appeared on land. That happened four hundred and twenty million years ago. It is called ‘The Silurian’ era.

First, plants spread on the land before animals. That happened five hundred forty two million years ago. This time is known as ‘The Paleozoic’ era. In comparison with the time when plants and animals appeared on the earth, man appeared many years later. It will be described in the next lesson.

Fig. 2.3. A sketch of a Prokaryote Bacteria.

Fig. 2.2. How lava poured out after the eruption of the ‘Sukurajima’ volcano in Japan.

9

Activity 04

Make a collection of pictures of plants, animals and man belonging to different eras, under the instructions of your teacher.

Fig. 2.4. A fossilized mark of an ‘Opabinia’, which lived five hundred and forty two million years ago. This was found in Canada.

Important Points

1. The earth was formed four thousand five hundred and forty million years ago. It was formed from a cloud of dust in the sky.

2. The earth, which was very warm, gradually got cool. But it has not yet become completely cool.

3. Living beings originated on the earth much later. Life first originated in water.

4. First, a tiny bacteria originated in the world.

5. First, plants appeared. Secondly, animals originated on the earth.

10

Part II

2.2 The Evolution of Ancient ManThe Origin of Man

Man is an animal that belongs to nature. But he is more unique than other animals. Man invented many arts and crafts of making various things (technology), exchanging ideas (language), and engaging in aesthetic performances such as dancing and singing (art). These abilities cannot be seen in other animals. Today, man is capable enough to go to the moon. Man achieved this progress as a result of facing and overcoming various challenges over a long period of time. You will learn in this lesson how man, who too is an animal among other animals, surpassed them and achieved so much. By learning it you will get a chance to realize how you should serve the society as you belong to the human race.

Man originated from a generation of apes. It is certainly an interesting story. The earth, on which we live, was extremely cold 2.5 million years ago. That time period is known as ‘The Great Ice Age’. At the beginning of the Great Ice Age, a type of Chimpanzees in Africa started shaping themselves in a different way than that of their relatives. These chimpanzees underwent some changes in their faces and in the teeth as they had to adapt themselves to the extreme coldness of that time and to eat unfamiliar food due to the lack of food. They got used to walk on their two feet. These changes set the background for mankind to evolve from chimpanzees.

Fig. 2.5. Man who was an ape first and then achieved progress over some hundred thousand years, is now powerful enough to influence the earth.

One of the main reasons that influenced the evolution of a human generation from an ape generation is the climate of the Great Ice Age. During this time, northern and southern parts of the earth were completely covered with ice layers. Trees did not bear fruit. Therefore, food was not in plenty. Mammoths lived during this period.

There were short warm periods during the era known as the Great Ice Age. There were four extremely cold periods and four short warm periods during the Great Ice Age. It was a happy time for all animals during the warm periods since there was food in abundance. Man evolved from a chimpanzee which belonged to an ape family during this Great Ice Age. This process is called ‘human evolution’.

At the initial stage there was not much difference between apes and humans in the shape of their bodies, but humans

11

Fig. 2.6. A picture of the environment during the Great Ice Age, drawn by an artist.

started doing one thing that was not done by other apes; that is, using tools. They picked up and collected round shaped stones from places of naturally running water. They used those stones to beat various types of nuts to eat and for other purposes.

Thus, the oldest ape who showed a tendency to become a man was known as 'Australopithecus'.

Humans were able to do what the other apes could not as the humans had the ability of walking on two feet. It has now been discovered that the Australopithecus who lived 3.8 million years ago had walked on two feet. When the time went on, they made more advanced tools out of stones. Its first stage was to hit one stone against another to break a splinter off and make a sharpened blade out of it.The first to make an attempt like this was called 'Homo Habilis'. Its meaning is 'capable man'. He lived during a period of 2.3 - 1.4 million years ago.

Man has acquried the skill to invent the modern tools today due to the past learning of making simple tools.

In addition to using stone tools, another fact that contributed to the progress of human beings was their use of fire. They could bake their food with the help of fire.

Long cold timeShort warm timeLong cold timeShort warm time

Great Ice Age

12

Therefore, they could digest their food easily. They could keep themselves warm during the cold seasons with the help of fire. As a result, their life became more comfortable and it made their bodies more beautiful.

The evidence, which shows using fire by man for the first time in the world has been found in Israel. That evidence goes back to seven hundred and ninety thousand (790,000) years. The man called ‘Homo Erectus’ first used fire. He lived 1,800 million years ago.

Though originating from an ape’s generation, man’s body changed from that of an ape into the present form with time. Gradually, the brain developed. Since the human brain was larger than that of an ape’s, human skull underwent transformation accordingly.

Linking first humans to the man who lives today happened through another developed man; he is known as ‘Homo Neanderthalensis’. He lived six hundred thousand years ago. This human had built houses out of bones of huge animals. He

ate cooked vegetables. He was a good hunter too.

Man developed his abilities over a period of about 2 million of (2,000,000) years. His brain developed well as a result of thinking to invent new things. Therefore, they discovered a language to express their ideas and arts such as dancing, music and painting to express their feelings one hundred thousand years (100,000) ago. The particular type of man who discovered such sophisticated things is known as ‘Homo Sapien’. He is the closest relative of all of us. We all belong to the family of Homo Sapien.

Fig.2.7. A skull of the man called Australopithecus who lived 2.5 million years ago.

g

Fig. 2.8. Man evolved from an ape into a well developed human over a period of 2.5 million years.

13

What was discovered by the first humans is very important for us even today. The best example for this is the discovery of fire and learning to use it.

We learnt some practices such as building houses and eating cooked meals from the humans who lived in ancient time.

Fig. 2.9. A well shaped old tool made of stone.

Fig. 2.10. A flute made by Homo Sapien man thirty thousand years ago. It had been made out of a bone of an animal.

Activity 05

Draw the pictures of the different stages of man’s evolution.

2.3 The Cultural Evolution of Man

Man, who developed both his body and brain from a process of being a chimpanzee to a human, changed his way of living too for a long period of time. This is known as ‘cultural change’. This fact is very obvious to us when we study the way in which the man changed the shape of the stone tools he invented in the ancient time.

The way in which man shaped his life, gradually changed over about 2.5 million (2,500,000) years. Stone tools, dwellings and food underwent changes and developed. We mentioned above that the stone tools made by man helped us to understand the progress achieved by man for a long time. Stone tools last long since they do not decay. It could be seen that with time stone tools had developed in shape, size and efficiency. According to the nature of the stone tools, man’s cultural progress is divided into three main stages; those are,

1. Paleolithic era

2. Mesolithic era

3. Neolithic era

How did people live during the

Paleolithic Era?

People encamped and lived in different places as groups in the Paleolithic era. One such group had a few families consisting of between 20 to 30 members in each. People started the custom of performing

14

funeral rites for their dead relatives during this era. One of the main tasks that they followed was applying colours on skeletons. Red ochre was used to make colours. Barter system started when people, who lived in the areas where red ochre was not abundant, received it from those who lived in the areas where there was red ochre abundantly. There was not a high population during this era. People in the Paleolithic Era lived by hunting and gathering food while roaming.

They started drawing pictures and making figures out of stones at the end of the Paleolithic Era.

Fig. 2.11. A figure of a woman made during the latter part of the Paleolithic era. This has been made out of a piece of bone.

Progress in the Mesolithic Era

Mesolithic era started in different time periods in different regions in the world. However, it can be stated with certainty that this era started in a time period between 20,000 and 18,000 years ago. As in the Paleolithic era the man in this era too, lived by hunting and gathering food. Man started hunting with bows and arrows during this era.

Fig. 2.12. A painting done by the people who lived during the Mesolithic era.

It was also during this era, that man started eating nuts, leaves and yams instead of hunting for food. Man had the habit of roaming from place to place in the Paleolithic era, but during the Mesolithic era he started to stay in one place for a long time. The people in that era were able to build their houses using sticks and leaves of trees. They drew pictures on rock surfaces using different colours. It is evident that when compared to the Paleolithic man, the Mesolithic man had a more developed lifestyle.

15

Fig. 2.13 Man in the Mesolithic era started building huts like this with sticks and leaves of trees.

Changes that occurred in the Neolithic Era

Neolithic era started about nine thousand years ago. Man started several important activities during this era. The most prominent one among those activities was starting agriculture. He started cultivating grains such as wheat, barley, paddy, and kurakkan (finger millet) during this era. Some animals were tamed and milk, eggs, meat and fur were taken from them. Therefore, in addition to agriculture, animal husbandry too became widespread among Neolithic people. For the first time, they discovered iron during this time. As a result of this discovery, they were able to make tools out of iron instead of stones. Their habit of living in one place, which started in the Mesolithic era, developed to the extent of forming villages. Worshipping gods for protection of animals and agricultural activities started in this era. Therefore, the tendency of people towards engaging in religious activities too started in the Neolithic era.

Fig. 2.14. This is a sickle made by the people who lived in the Neolithic era. This was made of clay. This belongs to 3,000 BC.

This lesson explained to you clearly how man developed himself gradually for a long period of time. The things that he developed during this period are still useful for us today.Among the most important activities related to the human development that occurred during the Neolithic era were agriculture and animal husbandry as well as living in villages. These in turn influenced the origin of civilizations to a great extent. As a result of engaging in agriculture for a considerable period of time, there was an abundance of food. This led to an increase in wealth and property among some people. Thus, during the Neolithic era, the division between rich and poor occurred for the first time. The rich who lived in the societies became powerful and they got used to urban living. You will learn about it in the next lessons.

16

Important Points

1. Man developed from a generation of apes. It happened 2.5 million years ago.

2. The process in which a human being emerged from an ape is known as ‘human evolution’.

3. A greater part of human evolution took place during the Great Ice Age. It was an extremely cold time period.

4. Man developed himself as a result of encountering various types of challenges.

5. Man differs from other animals because of the fact that he invented many things. These inventions are useful to us even today.

6. The ‘Homo Sapien’ introduced things such as language, music, painting and dancing to the world about one hundred thousand years ago.

Activity 06

Find the victories achieved by man during the different stages in which he lived. Complete the grid. Get instructions from your teacher.

Paleolithic eraMesolithic eraNeolithic era

Part III

Beginning of Agriculture

You are well aware of the fact that man’s development or human evolution took place during the Great Ice Age. About 12,000 years ago there appeared signs of an end to the then existing Great Ice Age. The extremely cold climatic condition became warm. Trees, plants and creepers grew lush due to this new change. Food was abundant for animals. People too felt this excitement. The era, in which this new climatic condition started, is known as ‘the Holocene Era’.

During this time people started farming instead of hunting animals. They found iron and utilized it for their use. They tamed animals and started animal husbandry instead of hunting them. People who lived in each country had cultivated different types of grains. For example paddy cultivation started in China for the first time. Wheat was first cultivated in Mediterranean region. Given below are some places where several types of grains, which we eat today, were first cultivated.

Maize – Central Mexico (3,000 B.C.) 5,000 years ago.Wheat – Mediterranean region (9,000 B.C.) 11,000 years ago.Paddy – China (7,000 B.C.) 9,000 years ago.

As a result of engaging in agriculture, man tended to live in one place with his family

17

members. As a result, people built houses to live in. Several families lived in one area. This in turn led to the formation of villages. Man formed villages for the first time in about 6,000 B.C. Ruins of these first villages have now been discovered.

With the beginning of agriculture, man attempted to identify edible varieties of grains and propagate them.

Fig. 2.15. An artist has painted a village of the ancient farmers.

Such varieties of grains that we eat today were propagated in different parts of the world in different time periods. In addition to the propagation of grains, people made tools that they needed for their agricultural activities. They were able to make strong and durable tools since they had found iron by this time. However, man had attempted to make agricultural tools even before he discovered iron. For example, a sickle, made of clay and belonging to an ancient period, has been discovered, in a cave in Israel, by archaeologists.

The houses built at the beginning were very simple. Their walls were made of clay and roofs were thatched with leaves. These houses were known as wattle and daub houses. In some countries, walls of houses were made of sticks cut out of trees.

Learning to cultivate is a greatachievement of man. As a result of

farming, he started living in one place instead of roaming to hunt. After reaping the harvest, man had his leisure time. He had the opportunity to do various other activities. As a result, the artistic activities such as painting, sculpture and music developed. Thus, his engagement in agriculture and animal husbandry enabled man to build civilizations.

This lesson explained to you how earliest species originated in water and spread on land later. Animals developed themselves

18

on land. The species, which live in the world at present, such as birds, reptiles, fish, insects, worms, arthropods and mammals grew in such a manner. They all originated from a single source though they have many differences. Man too is one of them among such different types of animals. He evolved from an ape to an intelligent human called ‘Homo Sapien’.

We all belong to the species of Homo Sapien, but there are dissimilarities in the faces of people who live in different regions in the world. The faces of people who live in China are different from those who live in Africa. Based on these differences, Homo Sapien man has been categorized into four groups namely Caucasoid, Negroid, Australoid and Mongoloid. The differences in the environments in which they live affected these differences.

Important Points

1. About 12,000 years ago, the cold weather that had existed up until then started to change.

2. A suitable background was created for man to start agricultural activities due to the fact that the weather in the world became warm.

3. Most of the grains we consume today are those that were first grown by people in ancient times.

4. Starting agriculture by man and using metal instead of stones took place during the same period.

19

Fig. 2.16 Life started in water. It started as a germ with one cell. Later, developed beings originated. This process speeded when the beings moved to land. Life, which belongs to nature, started in one place. Therefore, every living being has the right to live in this world safely. Hence, it is the duty of all of us to love and protect nature.

20

AustralopithecusHomo ErectusHomo Habilis

Homo Neanderthalensis Homo Sapien

Fig. 2.17 Man developed over a period of about 2.5 million years. The signs of change from an ape to a man could be seen in the physique of man. Face is prominent in the process of changing. These are some pictures designed in accordance with the skull shape of ancient men.

Fig. 2.18. This shows how Homo Sapiens, with different facial features, have spread all over the world.

CaucasoidAustraloid Mongoloid Negroid

21

Introduction

Man was in shape of an ape at the beginning, but he developed himself with time. We discussed in our earlier lessons how man started farming at a later time after walking from one place to another and collecting food by hunting. Man made his great achievements after starting to build cities and living in them. As many important events such as inventing scripts and using money took place during this time, it can be called as the civilization of man. That is what you will learn in this lesson. After learning this lesson, you will understand how man differs from other animals though he too is an animal belonging to the nature.

3.1 Origin of Civilizations

In the previous lesson, we learnt how man got used to forming villages and living in them since the ancient times. People who lived in those villages for a long time made progress day by day. Some villagers became wealthy as a result of farming and rearing animals. But some other villagers had to do their farming in infertile plots of lands, for which getting water facility was difficult. They could not get a good harvest and as a result their livelihood became difficult.

They were considered the poor. This led to a division in the society as rich and poor. Some time later, the rich and their relatives started living separately from these villages. Such places which consisted of houses made of stones instead of clay and wattle, well constructed streets, moats, walls and temples (shrines) for worshipping were called cities.These rich villagers were called citizens. Hereafter, they never engaged in farming or rearing animals. Instead, the poor villagers cultivated the land that belonged to the rich. But much of the harvest was taken by the wealthy people who lived in the cities.

A civilization means such kind of cities and the citizens who lived in them. A city was larger than a village. These citizens practised writing scripts. There was a group of citizens to rule the cities. The people who lived in the cities built religious places. They were engaged in trade with distant countries. Therefore, these basic characteristics help understand what a civilization is.

Thus, people who lived in various parts of the world in different eras built their own civilizations. Mesopotamian civilization, Nile River Valley civilization, Indu Valley civilization and Hwang Ho civilization were of the oldest of them.

Ancient Civilizations in the World3

22

It is important for us to learn about civilizations because various things which were produced by those who lived then are useful for our lives even today.

In mathematics we learn that a circle has 360 degrees. We know that there are 60 seconds in a minute and 60 minutes in an hour. This was taught to us by the mathematicians who lived in the ancient Mesopotamian civilization.

Activity 07

Draw a picture which depicts the difference between an ancient village and a city.

People who lived in the Hwang-Ho civilization introduced gun powder, the compass, paper and the printing machine to the world for the first time. All of these are immensely useful for us today.

For the first time, a rubber ball was produced by the people who lived in the Maya civilization. Rubber is a very useful material to us today. Rubber is used to produce slippers that we wear as well as tyres in airplanes.

3.2 Expansion of Civilizations and its Consequent Benefits to the World

Some information about several civilizations needs to be studied to understand what a civilization is. We have discussed below some interesting information about the Mesopotamian civilization, Egyptian civilization and the Indu River valley civilization.

A civilization is a process which reflects man’s progress. You too should be determined to serve the country by learning how those who lived in the ancient civilizations invented things to make our lives easy and comfortable.

Activity 08 Mark the expansion of civilizations on a map with the instructions of your teacher.

Important Points

1. People first lived in villages. They started living in cities much later.

2. A civilization is cities and a society where a large number of citizens live.

3. People who lived in old civilizations bestowed many different things to the world.

23

Part II

Mesopotamian Civilization

Introduction

This civilization developed in the river valleys of Euphrates and Tigris. The area where the two rivers existed belongs to Iraq at present. Mesopotamia means ‘the country in between two rivers'.

Mesopotamia is located in between the two rivers mentioned above. This civilization existed between 3,100 -2,900 BC, that is, five thousand years ago.

An ancient Mesopotamian clay slab which depicts a scene of ploughing

The farmers who belonged to the Mesopotamian civilization and who lived around the main cities were engaged in agriculture and animal

husbandry. As there was not enough water in those areas, they carried water through canals to their agricultural lands.

They ploughed ground with the help of animals to make it more suitable for cultivation. They used ploughs made of iron and mammoties (hoes) made of stones. They cultivated grains, fruits and vegetables. Wheat and barley were two main varieties of grains that they grew.

24

A Mesopotamian Ziggurat temple built in the ancient city of Ur

Mesopotamian people regarded nature as God and worshipped it. The rain, wind and floods were thus worshipped. They thought that they lived to please such gods who belonged to nature.

(a) The head of the group of gods (Pantheon) was a god called ‘Anu’.

(b) The god of Earth was called ‘Enkiki’.

(c) The god ‘Enlili’ was worshipped as the god of wind and farming.

There was a god for each and every city in Mesopotamia. The word ‘Ziggurat’ was used for the temples which were built to worship gods. The priests in those temples held a respectable position in the Mesopotamian society.

Some vessels belonged to the Mesopotamian Civilization

The Mesopotamian people were clever at trade travelling in small ships in rivers. Some items including food and drink were carried on these ships. The Assyrians who lived in the northern part of Mesopotamia were good traders.

They did their trading across the land. They engaged in trade by carrying the commodities on the backs of donkeys. They were called caravans.

25

Mesopotamian Society

Mesopotamian society was divided into four categories. (1) priests (2) people who represented the higher classes (3) people who represented the lower classes and (4) slaves. Priests were the most powerful in the Mesopotamian society. They acted as doctors in addition to doing their religious activities. Priests shaved their heads. They wore a cloak made of sheep hide (skin).

It was a custom of men and women who belonged to the higher classes to wear gold jewellery. Men grew their hair long. They grew a long beard. Women wore their clothes covering one shoulder. They too had long hair. People who represented the lower classes did not lead a luxurious life style, but they lived in their houses comfortably. They worked hard. They were paid for their work. The clothes and the jewellery they wore were not valuable.

Scripts

The Mesopotamians invented the oldest system of scripts in the world. These scripts are called ‘cuneiform’ scripts. ‘Kunya’ scripts were written on slabs made of clay. The scripts were written on the wet clay slabs with a sharpened piece of stick. The Mesopotamian writing system was similar to drawing figures at the very beginning. Later on it developed into a system of scripts. Various things had been written on these clay slabs. Mainly, these descriptions related to the trade affairs.

An epic story written by a person called Gilgamesh who lived in Mesopotamia in Kunya scripts, is considered to be the oldest literary work in the world. Though it was difficult to write on clay slabs, Mesopotamians did it in a clever way. They sent some letters written on clay slabs to the relevant person enclosing them in envelopes made of clay. There remains an old document of laws made by a ruler called ‘ Hammurabi’ who ruled Mesopotamia. It is the oldest law book in the world.

26

Indu River Valley Civilization

This civilization developed in the Valley of Indu River which flows across the North Western region in India. Today this region belongs to Afghanistan, Pakistan, and to the North Western part of India. This civilization reached its highest development between 2,600 and 1990 B.C. Mohenjo - Daro and Harappa were two main cities of this civilization.

Around five million people had lived in all the cities at its highest development time. People who lived in Indu River Valley civilization used metals such as copper, bronze, lead and tin. They lived in houses made of burnt clay bricks. There was a very advanced system of water-pipes. Their cities were well planned. Indu River people invented a system of symbols that could be used as scripts.

There were four main cities that belonged to Indu River Valley civilization. They were Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa, Dholavira and Kalibangan. All of them were well planned cities. This picture shows the ruins of such a city, which was found in archaeological excavations.

27

People who lived in the cities of Indu River Valley civilization had a methodically constructed system of gutters, wells and sewerage. This picture shows a well, built in such a city, which was used for private utility.

The well constructed roads in the ancient cities of Indu River Valley civilization can be considered as evidence for their transport. This picture shows a dummy of a cart used for transportation. This must have been a toy cart used for playing.

It is considered that this is a sculpture of a priest who lived in a city during Indu River Valley civilization. This was found in the Indu River Valley. The headband on the forehead of this sculpture is a sign which indicates that he was an esteemed person. Half-closed eyes of the person in this sculpture show that he is in a meditative position. It further confirms that the person in the sculpture was a priest.

28

This picture shows an emblem which belonged to the Indu River Valley civilization. There are some symbols at the top. Many thought that they must have been a set of scripts used to express some ideas. It is sure that the animal in the picture is a rhinoceros. None has found what had been written in the emblems that belonged to the Indu River Valley Civilization yet.

Egyptian (Nile River Valley) Civilization

This civilization developed in the lower part of the area of valley of Nile River which flows across the African continent in 3,150 B.C. Since this region belongs to present day Egypt, it is called by the same name. This civilization was ruled by a dynasty called Pharaohs for a long time. The main livelihood of the people who lived in Egyptian civilization was agriculture. Therefore, they were able to create an advanced irrigation system.

The greatest creation they bestowed to the world is the pyramids. The dead bodies of pharaoh kings were deposited in pyramids. Another important thing that they invented was scripts. These scripts were designed by combining figures of animals and various items. Those scripts are called the Egyptian pictograms.

29

This picture shows the pyramids which have been constructed in a place named Giza, some distance away from Cairo, the capital of Egypt. The dead bodies of the Pharaoh kings and their queens are laid in them. The oldest Pyramids in Egypt were constructed between 2,630 – 2,611 B.C. The pyramid in Giza is considered to be one of the seven wonders of the world.

Queen Neferneferuaten Nefertiti was the consort of one of the pharaoh kings called Akhenaten. She lived in 1,370 – 1,330 B.C. This sculpture of her bust must have been created while she was alive. She ruled Egypt for a short period of time after the death of king Akhenaten. Queen Nefertiti was one of the most beautiful women who lived in the ancient time.

The scholars who lived in the Egyptian civilization designed a set of symbols which could be used for writing purposes. These symbols had been designed from pictures of various items used and seen in their day-to-day life. These are called The Egyptian pictograms.

30

This is an old Egyptian picture which shows a prince chasing after a flock of birds. The surroundings have been beautifully painted in the picture.

This picture shows a mummy of a chieftain who belonged to the Egyptian civilization. People who lived in the Egyptian civilization introduced the method of mummifying to preserve the dead bodies for a long time.

Activity 09

Read the descriptions in the lesson and fill in the grid given below.

This picture shows the golden mask which was placed on the face of the mummy of king Tutankhamun who lived between 1,332 – 1,323 B.C.

(a) Monument(b) Civilization

Toy cart made of clayKunya scriptsPyramidsQueen NefertitiClay slabs with symbols of animalsGolden mask of King Tutankhamun

31

Settlements in Sri Lanka4

They too had worn jewellery on various occasions as we prefer to wear today. A bead, which had been worn to adorn one’s neck, made out of a tooth of a shark has been found in a cave. However, there is no trace to find out how they had prepared their dresses.

Part I

4.1 Early Settlements in Sri Lanka

Those who came to this country for the first time lived on hunting. In addition tohunting, they strolled from place to place and collected edible things for their food. They preferred living in caves during the rainy season. In the dry season they lived outside where animals roamed. They did so as it was easy for them to hunt animals.

They used tools made of stones for their day- to-day activities. Those tools were called stone tools. Besides, they used tools made of bones of animals and wood.

They ate wild jack, wild plantain and yams. They hunted animals such as deer, giant squirrels, tortoises, hares, porcupines, iguanas and snails for their food. They lived in different parts of our country.

Introduction

The first residing of people who arrive in a country is called settlement. One hundred and twenty five thousand years ago people came to our country, which is an island, for the first time. They came from a distant country. They were our ancestors. In this lesson you will learn how they developed this country while living here for a long time.

Fig. 4.1 They roamed and picked up fruits for their food in the hunting era. It was their main activity.

32

Fig. 4.4. Kithulgala Beli Lena (cave), believed to be used as a dwelling by people in the hunting era.

The early age is called the Stone Age since the settlers mainly used tools made out of stones. The people lived in the Stone Age did not have any difference. They never thought as Sinhalese, Muslim or Tamil. Such differences started recently.

Group Work

1.Find some splinters of quartz (Thiruwana gal/padihak katkal) from your surroundings. Discuss how they can be used to cut something.

2.Visit a cave with your history teacher and prepare a series of challenges that you would face if you had to live in it.

Fig. 4.2. People in the hunting era used to eat various kinds of yams which grew naturally.

They buried the dead bodies of their relatives in caves when they died.The bones of those who were buried thus have been discovered. The dead bodies had been curled and buried. They applied red colour on some bones. The colour had been made of some natural stones called ‘red-ochre’. These facts reveal that they had performed some funeral rites for the dead.

Fig. 4.3. A pendent (thella / pathaggam), made out of a shell of an oyster worn by hunters. This was discovered in Pahiyangala cave. (Photograph: from the Archaeological Department)

33

Important Points

1. Settlements started in our country around one hundred and twenty five thousand years ago.

2. Early settlers in this country came from a distant country. They lived in different parts of our country.

3. They lived on hunting and collecting other eatables.

4. They had known to wear jewellery and respect the dead.

5. The tools that they used for their day- to-day activities were made of stones, bones of animals and wood. That age was called Stone Age.

6. People in the Stone Age never had religious or racial differences.

Activity 10

1. Imagine a man in the Stone Age and draw a picture of one of his day-to-day activities.

2. Find a stone with a certain colour, make a colour that can be applied and write how people in the Stone Age could have made colours.

34

Part II

4.2 The Arrival of King Vijaya and the Expansion of Settlements

IntroductionStone Age existed for more than one hundred thousand years. But during a time between 5,000 – 4,500 years ago, people led a more advanced life style. Starting pottery and using tools made of iron instead of stone are the main features which depict this advancement. When prince Vijaya and his retinue landed in this country in 544 B.C. the people of our country were making a similar progress. You will learn it in detail in this lesson.

The oldest people who got used to farming lived in the hillside areas. It happened about 4,400 years ago (in 2,400 B.C.).

They lived in plains in mountainous areas. Such a plain is called a plateau. Stones used for grinding grains have been discovered from the places where they had lived. It is a piece of evidence that reveals that they had consumed grains for their food. They might have consumed the seeds of grass which grew naturally. However, the variety of those grains has not yet been discovered.

Fig. 4.5 This picture shows some grinding stones used by early farmers who lived in the mountain region in Sri Lanka.

They made clay pots and urns. They learned the art of producing iron during this time. It was a great achievement of them. They have produced iron out of ore by melting them. They used tools made of stone mainly for their day-to-day activities. However, the tools made of iron too were used for the same purpose though not abundantly. As the iron tools were strong enough, they could do their work more efficiently.

They lived in houses made out of clay and wattle. The roofs of those houses were thatched with leaves. They might have used dried Mana (tall grass) and Iluk for thatching the roofs of their houses. Even now the farmers in those areas use dried Iluk or Mana leaves for Pela (huts in the farm or Chena) for thatching.

They have erected tombs for their dead relatives. They had buried the dead bodies in a particular place, exhumed the bones after some time and cremated.The remaining ash was put into a clay pot and deposited in a tomb made of clay. These people had lived in the mountain regions during the very early stage. Later they migrated to plains. Gradually they were stepping towards advancement. The clay pots and iron tools they made and the houses they built clearly show that they had practised a systematic technology.

The Arrival of Prince VijayaHistory says that a prince called Vijaya and his retinue consisting of seven hundred people arrived from India and settled in this country in about 544 BC. This is clearly described in Mahawamsa. It is a very important historical source (chronicle) which helps us learn the history of our country. The place where Vijaya and his retinue landed is called Thambapanni. It is in the western coast of Sri Lanka.

35

It is believed that when prince Vijaya landed in this country, there lived three groups of people who belonged to Yakka, Naga and Deva tribes. A woman called Kuweni, who belonged Naga, Yakka, tribe caught Prince Vijaya’s people and hid them. Prince Vijaya who was searching his people met Kuweni. It is said that she was spinning cotton at the time.

Prince Vijaya who realized that Kuweni was a Yakka woman, raised his sword, frightened her and retrieved his people hidden by Kuweni. Later prince Vijaya married Kuweni. Kuweni bore a male child and a female child from prince Vijaya. They were named Jeewahattha and Disala respectively.

There were two cities which belonged to this Yakka tribe. They were called Sirisawatthu and Lankapura. On a day when there was a celebration in Sirisawatthu, Kuweni helped prince Vijaya to kill all Yakka people and become the King of Sri Lanka.

After destroying the Yakkas, prince Vijaya left Kuweni and married a princess brought from the state of Pandya in India.

The people who arrived with prince Vijaya settled in various places in the country. The Mahawamsa says that they started their villages in the area close to Malwathu Oya. Upatissa Gama was established by minister Upatissa. In the same way, Anuradhagama, was established by minister Anuradha.

According to Mahawamsa, prince Vijaya and his retinue consisting of seven hundred people belonged to the Aryan community. After the arrival of prince Vijaya and his retinue, the customs and formalities prevailing in the then Indian society spread in this country too.

36

Important Points

1. The people who lived in the Stone Age in this country started agriculture later.

2. They discovered iron 4,000 years ago. In addition to that, they knew the art of making pots and urns out of clay.

3. They erected tombs for their dead relations and performed funeral rites.

4. There is a story in Mahawamsa about settlements in Sri Lanka. According to the story, the settlement was started in this country by a prince called Vijaya and his retinue consisting of seven hundred people. They arrived in this country 2,500 years ago.

Activity 11

1. Write a description about three types of grains used in Chena cultivation.

2. Find and paste a picture of a hut made of clay and wattle and thatched with Iluk or Mana. Make a list of the materials used to build such a house.

37

Introduction

The ruler needs to be virtuous and intelligent to develop any country. Our country had an equal place with other countries in the world for about two thousand years. The sailors, who travelled in ships in the Indian Ocean, knew our small island by various names such as Sihaladeepa, Silediba, Ceylan, Serendib and Taprobane. The country became famous because of its natural beauty and the valuables exported to other countries in trade. Everyone knew our country as an independent land ruled by brave and intelligent kings who constantly worked for the welfare of the citizens. This lesson will teach you about some of such kings.

5.1 King Pandukabhaya

Prince Deeghagamini was king Pandukabhaya’s father. His mother was Princess Chithra. A Brahman named Pandula taught prince Pandukabhaya. Historical books describe that the prince underwent a lot of problems during his childhood. There were people who did not like the prince Pandukabhaya to be the king. They attempted to prevent him from becoming the king. However, the prince overcame all the obstacles by acting intelligently. When he was young, he married a princess named Swarnapali and became the king of the country.

King Pandukabhaya ruled the country residing in Anuradhapura. Then it was

called Anuradhagama, because it was not a well developed area then. The king wanted to develop the area where he was living and to change its name to Anuradhapura.

First, the king identified the area which should be named as Anuradhapura and marked the limits of the city. Then, for defence, he constructed a moat around the area, in which he would intend to build his city. He built four gates to enter the city from the four main directions and constructed a road system to connect the gates. Further, he made the interior part of the city beautiful by constructing gardens and ponds.

The king was intelligent enough to understand that removing garbage was needed when people live in a city. He appointed servants for removing garbage from the city. He appointed five hundred servants to clean the city, twenty two servants to clean lavatories, one hundred and fifty servants to carry dead bodies and another one hundred and fifty to clean and guard the graveyards.

The king built a hospital for the needs of the citizens. He constructed temples and religious places for people who had faith for various religions in order to create religious harmony among them. The blacksmiths believed in a god called Kammaradeva during that time. The king constructed temples (devalas) for the blacksmiths and the aborigines (the Wedda community) to worship their gods near the Western gate of the city. In the same way, he built religious places for other priests for their religious observances.

Our Brave Kings5

38

Cemetery for low caste

Gemunu Tank

Monasteries of Niganta, Brahmana and Pasanda, Arama

Paribrajikaramaya (monastery for wandering ascetics)

Buildings such as Prabhedageya

Cemetery

Villages for Chandalas

City

Village at the North Entrance (Uthuru Doragama)

Yakshani Devala

Walawamukhi DevalaMalwathu Oya

Village at the East Entrance(Negenahira Doragama)

Village at the South Entrance(Dakunu Doragama)

Abhaya Tank

Wesamuni Devala

Fig 5.1 A picture of Anuradhapura city drawn according to the description given in Mahawamsa.

It was the king Pandukabhaya who constructed a tank near a city for the first time. Then it was called Abaya Wewa (tank). Today it is known as Basawakkulama tank in Anuradhapura.

King Pandukabhaya ruled the country for seventy years striving hard to render a yeoman service to his citizens. He faced many hardships during his childhood, but he overcame them and dedicated himself for the country’s benefit. It is an example for you. You should be determined to be a respectable citizen by taking the king Pandukabhaya's life as an example.

Activity 12 1. Observe the Fig. 5.1 well.

2. Write five sentences about how king Pandukabhaya had created his city.

Important Points

1. Prince Pandukabhaya had to face many hardships during his childhood.

2. However, he overcame all his hardships and obstacles and became the king of the country. Princess Swarnapali was his queen.

3. King Pandukabhaya developed the previous Anuradhagama a city. Later it was known as Anuradhapura.

4. He made Anuradhapura an attractive city.

5. It is King Pandukabhaya who constructed a tank (Wewa) near a city for the first time. It was named Abhaya Wewa.

39

5.2 King Devanampiyatissa

King Mutaseewa was the father of King Devanampiyatissa. History has no record of who his mother was. King Devanampiyatissa had nine brothers and two sisters. The king was the second child of the family. His name was Tissa before he became the king. Prince Tissa became the king after King Mutaseewa. During that time India was ruled by emperor Ashoka. After king Tissa came into power, he sent a group of emissaries to meet emperor Ashoka. Prince Aritta was the leader of the group of emissaries. On their return to Sri Lanka, emperor Ashoka sent what was necessary for king Tissa for his coronation. King Tissa’s coronation ceremony was held according to the instructions given by emperor Ashoka. The title “Devanampiya” used by emperor Ashoka was later added to King Tissa’s name. Its meaning was ‘adorable to god’.

Mihindu Thero : O King, what is this tree?

King: Reverand Sir, this is a mango tree.

Mihindu Thero: King, are there other mango trees except for this one?

King: Yes, reverend Sir, there are many other mango trees.

Mihindu Thero: O King, are there other trees except those mango trees?

King: Yes, reverend Sir, there are other trees, but they are not mango trees.

Mihindu Thero: O King, are there other trees except those mango and non-mango trees?

King: Yes, reverend Sir, it is this mango tree.

The king astutely answered to the questions asked by reverend Mihidu Thero. Mihindu Thero realized that the king was an intelligent person.

Arahath Mahinda (Mihindu), the son of emperor Ashoka, with a group of Bhikkhus brought Buddhism to Sri Lanka when king Devanampiyatissa was ruling this country. This remarkable event took place 237 years after the demise of the Buddha. The king acknowledged them with great honour. Arahath Mahinda knew the fact that the king of the country should be intellegent if Buddhism would be established in the country. At this moment Arahath Mahinda asked a few questions from the king pointing at a mango tree close by.

King Devanampiyatissa venerated the group of Arahath Bhikkhus namely Ittiya, Uttiya, Sambala, Baddhasala and the Bhikkhu Sumana Samanera (novice) together with a layman called Bhanduka led by Arahath Mahinda, immensely. He constructed the Mahamewuna garden and a temple called Tissarama in it and offered them to Arahath Mahinda.

40

Thuparamaya

Thuparamaya was built by king Devanampiyatissa. He did not have an idea of the shape of a tope (Dageba). Therefore, he enquired it from Arahath Mahinda Thero. He pointed out the king that it should be of a shape of a heap of paddy. Accordingly, Thuparama was constructed in a Dhanyakara (paddy-heaped shape). However, it took a shape of a bell as a result of reconstruction work ensued at later periods. At present it has the shape of a bell (Ghantakara). There are three rows of stone posts around Thuparama. They are ruins of an old building erected to protect the Dageba. A building of that nature was called a Vatadageya. (A Vatadageya is a circular house encircling a tope). A building of Vatadageya for Thuparamaya was erected by King Vasabha. The right collar-bone of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in the Thuparama.

Thuparama Dageba in Anuradhapura was constructed by king Devanampiyatissa. He constructed some other buildings including a Dana Sala (a house for the purpose of collecting and offering meals for Bhikkhus)

named Lahabath Ge. He built a few pirivenas as needed for the studies of the Bhikkhus and named the area as Maha Vihara and offered it to the Maha Sangha.

41

Fig 5.2 During king Devanampiyatissa's rule a sappling of Sri Maha Bodhi was brought to this country by the nun Sangamitta Theri.

Sri Maha Bodhi was brought to Sri Lanka during the rule of King Devanampiyatissa. The nun, Ven. Sangamitta Theri, brought this sacred object in a ship from India and landed on the harbour 'Dambakolapatuna'. The Dambakolapatuna harbour was located in Jaffna then. The king who went to welcome both Sri Maha Bodhi and the nun Sangamitta Theri, accompanied

them to Anuradhapura ceremoniously. A group of people who represented eighteen crafts arrived in Sri Lanka with the nun Sangamitta. The king planted the Sri Maha Bodhi in the garden 'Maha Mewuna' in a ceremony. Further, he erected a building called Maha Bogeya and offered it to the Maha Sangha. In addition, he constructed places such as ponds for the use of the Bhikkhus.

The king had the caves in Mihintale mountain cleaned and offered them to Arahath Mahinda along with those who had already ordained. These caves are known as Ata Seta Len (sixty eight caves) as they were sixty eight in number.

Another important task performed by King Devanampiyatissa was demarcating the borders of Anuradhapura city. The king did so with the intention of constructing more Buddhist temples and making the city more beautiful. Arahath Mahinda gave instructions to the king in demarcating the city. Historical records say that the king gave directions to demarcate the city with a plough drawn by two tuskers named Maha Paduma and Kunja according to the instructions given by Arahath Mahinda.

42

King Devanampiyatissa was the first king to embrace Buddhism in Sri Lanka. The nun order (Bhikkhuni Sasana or Meheni Sasna) of Sri Lanka started after the ordination of queen Anula, the wife of king Devanampiyatissa’s brother. The Bhikkhu order (the Bhikkhu Sasana) of this country started with the ordination of prince Aritta, a son of a relative of the king. We too had the opportunity to be Buddhists due to king Devanampiyatissa’s intelligence and piety. You too should be determined to serve the country by keeping the great service done by the king in your mind.

Activity 13

Paste pictures which display the important events given below that happened during king Devanampiyatissa’s rule and write three sentences about each of the events.1. Arrival of Arahath Mahinda Thero 2. Bringing Sri Maha Bodhi3. Thuparama Dageba

Important Points

1. The title ‘Devanampiya’ attached to the name of king Devanampiyatissa means ‘adorable to god’.

2. King Devanampiyatissa had his coronation for the second time under emperor Ashoka’s patronage.

3. Buddhism and a branch of Sri Maha Bodhi were brought to Sri Lanka during the rule of King Devanampiyatissa.

4. Thuparama Dageba in Anuradhapura was built by king Devanampiyatissa.

5. Demarcating Anuradhapura city was done during his rule.

Fig. 5.3 King Devanampiyatissa made arrangements to bring Sri Maha Bodhi and plant it in Anuradhapura in a ceremony.

43

5.3 King Dutugemunu

King Dutugemunu was an intelligent and efficient ruler who reigned our country.His father was king Kavantissa. His mother was Queen Vihara Maha Devi. He had a brother named Tissa. This royal family lived in Magama kingdom. Southern and South-Eastern parts in Sri Lanka belonged to the old Magama kingdom. This region was known as Ruhunu Rata then.

Prince Dutugemunu realized that he could develop Anuradhapura if he had a chance to rule it. He was determined to rule Anuradhapura when he was old enough to do so.

Fig. 5.4 Prince Saddhatissa showed the half-constructed Ruwanweli Stupa after covering the unfinished part with a piece of white cloth to king Dutugemunu who was at his deathbed.

King Elara

Anuradhapura was ruled by a king named Elara before King Dutugemunu aascended the throne. King Elara came from Chola country. He collected the whole income which received to the country from agricultural affairs and the trade affairs at the Mathota harbour located in the coastal area in the western side of Anuradhapura. He was a righteous king. A chariot of the king hit a pagoda and a part of it was damaged. Mahawamsa states that king Elara took measures to repair the pagoda.

44

King Kavantissa understood the objective of prince Dutugemunu and prepared a group of strong people suitable for the purpose and took steps to increase the production of food. He sent prince Dutugemunu’s brother, prince Tissa to Digamadulla to achieve this

objective. Then Digamadulla was present day Ampara area. Prince Dutugemunu and king Elara had a face to face combat in the place of Vijithapura. Forty four years rule of King Elara came to an end with his death.

King Dutugemunu started constructing Ruwanweli Seya. In historical sources it has been introduced as Maha Tupa. The name Rathnamali has been used in books written in Pali language. It is said that the bodily relics of the Lord Buddha, which had been deposited in Ramagama Dageba in India was later deposited in Ruwanweli Stupa. At the initial stage, the height of the Stupa was 300 feet and diameter of the base of its nucleus was 298 feet. The construction work of this Stupa was finished by king Saddhatissa. His son, king Lajjitissa made some renovation work in Ruwanweli Stupa, but historical or archaeological sources do not substantiate the fact that the Stupa was enlarged by any one.

Fig. 5.5 It is said that a cow came to the king Elara's palace and tolled a bell to inform the crime committed by the king's son by running his chariot over her calf (the cow which came to the place was the mother of the slain calf). This picture shows how that story was drawn in a Buddhist temple in 19th century (kind sponsorship for the picture: Professor Rev.Haguranketha Dheerananda Thero).

45

In this fight prince Dutugemunu was supported by ten clever and intelligent army commanders to defeat King Elara. Nandimithra, Suranimala, Mahasona, Gotayimbara, Theraputtabhaya, Bharana, Velusumana, Kanchadeva, Pussadeva, Labhiya Vasabha were those ten army commanders. The inscriptions made by some of these commanders have been discovered. After prince Dutugemunu became the king in Anuradhapura, these ten army commanders were known as ‘Ten Great Giants’ (Dasa Maha Yodhayo). The tusker called ‘Kandula’ too was a great support to the king.

King Dutugemunu built several topes (Dagebas) and religious places in Anuradhapura. Miriswetiya, Ruwanweliseya and Lowamahapaya were some of them. The king passed away before he could finish the construction work of Ruwanweliseya Dageba. Later its work was completed by king Saddhatissa, the brother of king Dutugemunu. Historical records say that king Dutugemunu constructed ninety nine Dagebas and religious places. In addition, the king did much work for the benefit of the citizens. The king ordered his subjects to pay respect to king Elara’s grave whenever they went passing it.

People made impressive stories about king Dutugemunu, his parents, his brother and his army commanders who supported him in the fight on account of the king’s heroism. Though the king was known as ‘Dutugemunu’, his real name was ‘Gamini Abhaya’. The name Dutugemunu was used after he became the king. The word ‘Dutu’ derives from the Sanskrit word ‘Drushtha’. Its meaning is ‘intelligent’. Your history teacher will tell you stories about king Dutugemunu in the classroom.

Though the achievement of any objective is difficult, it can be done by acting intelligently and courageously along with proper planning. Being loyal to one’s country and religion, respecting those who deserve and loving his country men are some prominent qualities that could be seen in King Dutugemunu’s character. You, who have been born in a country where such great kings lived, too should make an effort to live in the same manner.

Important Points

1. King Dutugemunu united the country.

2. The king hailed from Magama.

3. The parents and the brother of King Dutugemunu helped him immensely to succeed.

4. Ten clever and intelligent army commanders assisted the king to unite the country.

5. Mirisawetiya, Ruwanweliseya and Lowamahapaya were built by this king.

6. King Elara who ruled Anuradhapura before King Dutugemunu was a righteous king. He ruled Anuradhapura for forty four years.

Activity 14

Select any topic given below and make a speech in the class.

1. King Dutugemunu2. King Elara3. King Kavantissa

46

5.4 King Valagamba

King Valagamba was another great ruler who reigned our country. King Saddhatissa was his father. Historical sources do not state who his mother was. He had three brothers named Thulattana, Lajjatissa and Naga. His brother Naga became the king later and was known as Kallatanaga. Queen Somadevi was King Valagamba’s wife.

King Valagamba’s rule was a little difficult time. He had to face a group of invaders who came from South India and a problem created by a Brahmin called ‘Tissa’ who protested against him. However, the king, who was wise and brave, overcame all his difficulties.

Abayagiri Stupa in Anuradhapura was constructed by King Valagamba. After constructing the Stupa and its temple, the king offered it to a Bhikkhu called Kupikkala Tissa Thero who had assisted him much when the king was in a time of stress. The king offered Abhayagiriya temple to the monk in order to pay him gratitude. The Abhayagiri temple later became an international education centre.

Another important event that took place in King Valagamba’s rule was writing of Buddhist religion in books. Until then the monks had preserved Buddhism by learning it by heart. The doctrine preached by Lord Buddha includes in the Thripitaka (the three scriptures). The transformation of Thripitaka from oral

Fig. 5.6 King Valagamba thought that the Buddhist doctrine, which had been preserved by memorizing so far, would be distorted. Therefore he gathered the Maha sangha (Monks) and the doctrine was written down.

47

Abhayagiri Stupa was built by King Valagamba. He offered the Stupa to a monk named Kupikkala Tissa. At the initial stage of its construction work, the height of the Stupa was 350 feet. The diameter of the nucleus of its base was 355 feet. Its present height is 245 feet. There is no historical proof to find what sacred relic has been deposited in the Stupa. King Gajabahu I enlarged the size of the Stupa and built four gates in its compound. Four vestibules (Vahalkada) were built in four main directions during King Kanittatissa’s rule. A large number of monastery buildings belonged to the Abhyagiri Vihara (temple).

tradition into the written form is called ‘writing down’ or 'inscribing'. It was written in ‘Aluviharaya’, a temple in Mathale.

There was a terrible famine during the time when King Valagamba was hiding in the forest. This famine, which was a result of not having rain for years, was called ‘Beminitiyasaya’(the famine named Beminitiya). Some Buddhist monks, who had learnt the Thripitaka by heart, too passed away due to the famine. The king

was intelligent enough to understand that it was difficult to preserve Buddhism only through the process of oral tradition. Moreover, it would be harmful to the valuable Buddhist doctrine. Therefore he made necessary arrangements to transform it into the written form. It was a noble service done to the Buddhists living all over the world by the Sri Lankans.

The king conferred caves to the monks. Several inscriptions in which his name appears have been found. In the

48

inscriptions his name is mentioned as ‘Pitha Raja’ (father king). It was another name used to introduce him then. Mahawamsa says that the king earned this name because he looked after his brother’s son as a father after his brother died. His brother was king Kallatanaga. The name ‘Pithu Raja’ has been referred to as ‘Pitha Maha Raja’ and ‘Pitha Raja’ in the inscriptions.

The queen Soma Devi, the wife of king Valagamba too was a brave woman. When the king had problems from a group of invaders from South India, she went forward to protect the king without fear. They abducted the queen and took her to South India. The king brought her back to Sri Lanka after defeating the enemies. He made her his consort. Even contemplating of a queen who was so brave and loyal to the country makes us feel proud.

King Valagamba did many things for the benefit of the people. He was interested in building Pirivenas (educational institutes in temples for monks) to enhance the education of monks. He gave instructions to build a Stupa called Somaramaya in memory of the place where queen Soma Devi went forward to the enemies. That stupa was offered to the monks.

The way that king Valagamba strived to work for the benefit of the country by overcoming the hardships he encountered sets a good example to you. You too should be determined to shape up your own life by taking the intelligent and far-sighted king’s life as an example.

Important Points

1. King Saddhatissa was the father of prince Valagamba.

2. During the ruling time of King Valagamba, he had to face some troubles from enemies.

3. Queen Soma Devi, his wife, was a brave woman.

4. The events such as writing Thripitaka in books and building Abhayagiri Stupa were some great services rendered by King Valagamba.

Activity 15

Write an essay of ten sentences on the topic ‘King Valagamba was a Great King’.

49

5.5 King Vasabha

The parents of King Vasabha are not known. There are no historical records on his parents. He had spent his childhood at his uncle’s place. The uncle of King Vasabha served as the army general of the country. King Vasabha belonged to a lineage named ‘Lambakarna’. The people from the lineage of Lambakarna were in charge of documentary affairs of the country then. A few great kings from the Lambakarna lineage ruled Sri Lanka. King Vasabha was the first to rule this country representing the Lambakarna dynasty.

This king rendered a great service to the progress of Buddhism and the citizens. Specially, the development process of

constructing tanks took place during king Vasabha’s rule. He constructed eleven tanks large in size for the first time. Twelve canals were constructed to carry water from tanks to the paddy fields. The Elahera canal (Elahera Ela) which carries water up to a distance of 30 miles was constructed by King Vasabha.

A few places where there are tanks constructed by King Vasabha have been discovered. The tank named ‘Mayenthi’ constructed by him is presently known as ‘Mahawilachchiya Wewa’. The tank named ‘Manaketi’ then is presently known as ‘Manankattiya Wewa’. The tank presently named ‘Nochchipothana Wewa’ was called ‘Wathamangana Wewa’ then. All these tanks are located in Anuradhapura district. The engineers of

Fig. 5.7. King Vasabha took steps to construct the city wall of Anuradhapura by making it taller.

50

The king had learnt that the aroma of Desaman flowers (jasmine) was the sweetest of all other flowers. The king wanted to check whether it was a truth. He kept a handful of flowers from a few varieties in a room. He placed the same quantity of jasmine flowers among the other varieties too. Then he went out of the room and closed the door behind. After some time, the king opened the door and suddenly smelt the aroma of jasmine flowers before that of the other flowers. Thus, he accepted that what he had learnt was true. The story shows how watchful the king was in believing something.

King Vasabha introduced the system of carrying water through tubes under ground instead of the then existed system of taking water through canals to bathing ponds.

The king divided the country into areas and appointed officers to oversee them in order to make the administration easy. Accordingly, a minister named ‘Isigiriya’ was appointed to oversee the present day ‘Jaffna’ area. This information has been written in a golden plate. This golden plate is called ‘ Vallipuram’ golden plate. There is a record in the Vallipuram golden plate that minister Isigiriya constructed a temple in Jaffna. Since the golden plate was found in a place named ‘Vallipuram’ in Jaffna, it is called by that name.

The king rendered a great service to enhance the beauty as well as the security of Anuradhapura city. He made arrangements to build a wall around the Anuradhapura city. The ruins of this wall

could be seen in Anuradhapura even today. He constructed ponds in the city and developed a system to take water to them from the tanks. The king instructed relevant officers to rear swans in them.

His contribution to the enhancement of Buddhism was also great. He constructed a Vatadage around Thuparama Dageba, and a Pohoya Geya (Chapter house) in the Isurumuniya temple and conferred them to the monks.

He constructed Stupas in the Sithulpawwa temple in Tissamaharama. Further, he took steps to renovate the temples situated in various parts of our country.

The king had to invest a large sum of money for the betterment of his subjects. The king introduced a tax system because he wanted to encourage people to use public property carefully and to find needed money to maintain them. Accordingly, those who used water in the tanks had to pay a certain amount of money as tax. In turn, the money collected in that way was

51

spent on renovating the tanks.

King Vasabha, who ruled the country for forty four years, created a new era in this country. His courage, intelligence and watchfulness set a good example for your life.

Important Points

1. King Vasabha was the prime-mover of the dynasty called ‘Lambhakarna’.

2. He rendered a great service to the irrigation of this country. He constructed 11 large

tanks.

3. The ‘Vallipuram’ golden plate was written during his ruling time.

4. The king introduced a tax system to increase the local income of the country and

divided the country into administrative units for easy ruling.

Activity 16

Write answers to the questions about king Vasabha.

1. What is the dynasty king Vasabha belonged to?

2. Write one step that the king made to make his ruling (administration) easy.

3. Write two services that king Vasabha rendered to the country’s economy.

4. What is the name of the golden plate which was written during king Vasabha's rule?

W i

52

5.6 King Mahasen

King Mahasen was a great king who ruled our country. His father was king Gotabhaya. King Mahasen had a brother named Jettatissa. There are no historical records about the mother of king Mahasen.

King Mahasen made a great contribution to develop the irrigation system of Sri Lanka. He constructed sixteen tanks and one main canal. There are a few large tanks that belong to his irrigation activities. Minneriya tank is a major one among them. Its bund is of one and a quarter miles in length. It is 4,670 acres large. In ancient time it was known as ‘Minihira Wewa’. The tank then known as ‘Wallurawapi’ is called ‘Hurulu Wewa’ today. ‘Kanadara Wewa’ in Mihintale was also constructed by him. In ancient time

it was known as ‘Khanu Wewa’.

King Mahasen built several temples. ‘Jethawanaramaya’ in Anuradhapura is a major one among them. It is believed that the ‘Pati’ (belt) relic of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in the ‘Jethawana Dageba’ built by him. Minneriya Viharaya, Gokanna Viharaya, Ekapilla Viharaya, and Dasengala Viharaya, are religious places built by the king. In addition to the construction, he renovated some temples in various parts of the country. He offered robes to the monks. He ruled the country for 27 years.

Since the king rendered a great service for the benefit of the people, he was much respected by his subjects. He was considered to be a god because he constructed tanks as large as oceans.

Fig. 5.8 King Mahasen constructed the Jethawana Stupa in Anuradhapura.

53

Even today he is worshipped in the name of God of Minneriya, ‘Minneri Deviyo’.

Some fanes (Devala) built on behalf of him can be seen in Polonnaruwa area.

King Mahasen strived hard to serve both his country and his subjects. Therefore, he is worshipped as a god. It sets a good example to you. You should carefully study the activities of such great kings who ruled our country and think of serving your country and its people when you become adults in the future. That is how you learn an important lesson from history.

Jethawana Stupa was built by king Mahasen. According to historical sources, the Stupa was of 400 feet in height after completion of its construction work. The diameter of the base of its nucleus was 370 feet. It was the biggest Stupa in Sri Lanka. It was also the biggest Stupa made out of bricks in the world. The historical sources say that the ‘Pati (belt)’ relic of the Lord Buddha has been deposited in this Stupa. Like in Abhayagiri temple, many monastery buildings were built in the ‘Jethawana’ temple.

54

Important Points

1. King Mahasen made a great service to the agriculture and irrigation system of this country.

2. Minneriya tank was constructed by King Mahasen. Its bund is one and a quarter miles in length. In ancient time it was known as ‘Minihira Wewa’.

3. King Mahasen built the ‘Jethawana Stupa’ in Anuradhapura. It was the tallest building made of bricks in Asia.

4. King Mahasen is worshipped as ‘God of Minneriya’ even today.

Activity 17

Find information about King Mahasen under your teacher’s instructions. Design a booklet.

55

5.7 King Dhathusena

King Dhathusena’s father was a person named Datanama. King Dhathusena had a younger brother named Salathisbo. Six invaders including Pandu, Parinda, Khudda Parinda who came from South India had usurped power and were ruling Anuradhapura before King Dhathusena came into power. The country was liberated from the invaders by king Dhathusena. He belonged to the lineage (dynasty) of Maurya.

King Dhathusena’s service to the country is mainly seen in his irrigational constructions. There are records in history books that he constructed eighteen large tanks and eighteen small tanks.

‘Kala Wewa’ in Anuradhapura was one of his great irrigational works. It is very useful to the people living in Anuradhapura. The canal called ‘Yodha Ela’ connecting ‘Kala Wewa’ and ‘ Tisa Wewa’ in Anuradhapura was constructed by him. Its length is 54 miles. Its gradient is six inches per one mile. This canal is known as ‘Jaya Ganga’ too.

King Dhathusena made a great contribution to the development of Buddhism in the country. He built several Viharas (temples) as well as renovated the dilapidated ones. Mahawamsa says that he built eighteen temples. He constantly attended to the needs of monks.

The king reconstructed the ‘Maha Pali’ alms hall (Dana Salawa) to which the monks arrived in to have their meals.

Fig. 5.9 King Dhathusena gave instructions to construct large tanks.

56

King Dhathusena ruled this country for eighteen years. He had two sons named ‘Kashyapa’ and ‘Mugalan’ and a daughter. Since most of the people were engaged in agriculture at the time, the king paid his attention to develop the irrigation system. The king performed in an exemplary way to serve for the benefit of the monks who acted to save this country. All of this information will help you to shape up your life.

Important Points

1. King Dhathusena belonged to a dynasty called Maurya.

2. Irrigation works such as ‘Kala Wewa’ and ‘Yodha Ela’ were constructed by king Dhathusena. He constructed eighteen large tanks and eighteen small tanks.

3. He made a great contribution to the development of Buddhism.

Activity 18

1. Name the irrigation works constructed by King Dhathusena. 2. Write two names of temples built by him.