==== BLOCKS ==== 

101For free distribution

PERSONALITY

10

What are your special qualities?What are the special qualities of your friends?

Activity 01

Reading and Speaking

Vidath made the following speech at a meeting of the English Literary Association meeting. Read it and discuss the questions that follow.

Good afternoon everybody! Dear teachers and friends, I’m here to speak a few words on “Personality.”

Recently I read an article on ‘personality’ and this made me think about my own personality. After reading it, I started wondering how my friends differ from me. This inspired me to find more about this topic.

Just as people identify us with our name, they identify us with our qualities and behaviours. So each person is unique. This is the result of our unique personality. Personality can be explained based on the patterns of behaviour and personal traits. Also these things are found to be a dynamic and an organized set. In other words, it can tell you the type of person you are, which is shown by the way you behave, feel and think.

From where do we get our personality? It can come to us by birth and by the environment we live in. Hence, people are different from one another. We come across many people in our day to day life. Among them we may find

102For free distribution

a friend who is very much outgoing and another, a little shy. Therefore two friends with different personalities should not mock at each other or compare themselves but ought to understand that these differences are natural. Although personality is different from person to person, the aspects of one’s personality can be developed. Yet, some of the features of the basic personality type will remain unchanged. However, we can and we ought to try to change the aspects of our personality that we are unhappy with. Moreover, this will help us to strengthen ourselves and become a well-rounded individual. This could be started by the help of our school environment. That is the reason why we get so many different kinds of activities to do at school. We need to participate in these activities willingly to develop ourselves. Let’s focus on building up our personality by changing some of its negative aspects. Thank you! 1.1 Read and answer.

1. Who made this speech?2. Who is present in this meeting?3. What is the topic of the article mentioned in the speech?4. Is personality unique to a person? Why do you say so?5. Can personality be changed? Give reasons for your answer.

1.2 What do the underlined words in the following phrases refer to? 1. After reading it 2. Also these things are found 3. It can come to us 4. another, a little shy

1.3 Find single words for each of the following phrases.

a) existing one only of that type b) social c) to laugh at somebody d) to make someone strong

103For free distribution

Learning Point

“We ought to try to change the aspects of our personality that we are unhappy about”.

Here “ought to” is used to express an advise or to show something you should do.

“We need to change this on our own free will”.

Here “need” expresses necessity.

You can express the negative form of both the above with “not”. “ought not” and “need not”

Activity 02

Complete the sentences using “ought to”, “need” or their negative forms.

1. A:“I have a bad tooth” B: “You ……….. to see a dentist.”2. They …………. to listen to their parents.3. I …………. to talk to you. Can I see you now?4. You ……….. advise me. I know how to solve this matter.5. She ………….. start doing exercises or she would be in trouble.

Activity 03

Group work

Read the list of words given below. Find out good qualities a person should possess. Use a dictionary to find the meanings of the difficult words.

helpful aimless understanding recklessdisobedient stingy wasteful moodywise pleasant overconfident boisterousdeceptive lazy obedient gulliblesmart troublesome over sensitive sarcastic talkative outgoing truthful ambitious loyal honest humorous passiveuntidy hot-tempered pessimistic self-satisfiedresponsible dominating polite self-centredpunctual optimistic kind-hearted cynical

104For free distribution

Write the above words in the right column of the following table.

Positive qualitiesNegative qualities

Activity 04

Select 5 positive qualities and draw a table as shown below. Go to each student in the class and ask about the qualities of their best friend.

QualityNumber of friendskind////helpful//

• Do you think that your best friend is helpful?• Is he/she kind?

Activity 05

Represent your findings in a bar graph and explain it using the phrases given.You may start like this: the majority of , least number of, approximately, minimum,equal number of …, more than, less than, maximum

Personal qualities of friends

0

108642

121416

Ambitious

Brave

Capable

Detemined

Fearless and ....

Generous and....

Quality

Number

The graph shows personal qualities of my friends. The majority of my friends.......

105For free distribution

Role play

Given below is an interview held to select new prefects for the school.

Applicant : Good morning sir, may I come in?Principal : Good morning! Come in. Please be seated.Applicant : Thank you, sir.Teacher-in-charge: You are Vishwa, aren’t you?Applicant : Yes madam.Principal : Ok, tell us something about yourself.Applicant : Sir, I’m CharakaVishwa from Ranminigama. I’m in grade 10. I’ve been studying at this school since I was in Grade 1. I’m good at electronics. I’m the President of the school Electronics Club.Teacher- in- charge: That’s good. Why do you think you should become a prefect?Applicant : Well, I can work hard and I have a strong determination to do well at whatever I do. I have proven it in my sports achievements as the captain of our under 17 volleyball team. I’m friendly and I can work with others. So, I think I can be a good prefect.Principal :Great! So what are your future plans?Applicant :Sir, first, I will study well and pass the O/L exam. If I pass well, I will select information technology subject stream for A/Ls. If I don’t get through my A/L in the first attempt I will resit the exam and try to enter the university to study information technology.Teacher- in- charge: Does it mean that your ambition is to become an IT professional?Applicant : Yes madam.Principal : What have you planned to do if you get selected as a prefect?Applicant : I will perform my duties honestly and will try my level best to be a good role model to my fellow friends.Principal : Ok Vishwa, very good. If you are selected, your name will be displayed on the notice board tomorrow. All the best!Applicant :Thank you very much sir.

106For free distribution

Activity 06

6.1 Write true (T) or false (F).

a) The applicant studies in grade 10. □b) He is the Vice President of the school Electronics Club. □c) He is good at sports. □d) He was interviewed only by the principal. □e) The applicant's ambition is to become an IT professional. □

6.2 Answer the following questions.

a) What is the name of the applicant?b) Why does he think that he is qualified to be a prefect?c) Do you think the applicant deserves the position? Give reasons for your answer.

6.3 Find words which mean the opposite of the following:

a) weakb) individuallyc) pastd) dishonestlye) minimum

Activity 07

Speaking

Work in groups and conduct a similar interview to select the monitor for your class. You may use the expressions used in the interview given above.

107For free distribution

Learning PointPronounsLook at the examples taken from Vidath’s speech.

1.Hence people are different from one another.2.Therefore two friends with different personalities should not mock at each other.In the above examples “one another” is used to show something (the same thing) done by more than two people and “each other” to show something (the same thing) done by two people.“Each other” refers to two people“One another” refers to more than two peopleThey are called reciprocal pronouns.

Activity 08

WritingComplete the following sentences using “one another” or “each other”.

1.The teacher asked the students to cooperate with ………………. when doing group work.2.Upendran and Ganesh took turns in helping ………………. 3.Both sisters wanted to look after ………………….. during the absence of their parents.4.The shelf reader staked the books on ……………………. and put them on a trolley. 5.Everybody should lend a hand to …………………… during times of emergency.

108For free distribution

Values

Yoga, Rasuni, Ganeshan, Sazi and Gamika had some free time at school to have a dicussion among themselves. Let’s read their dialogue.

Gamika : Hey, Sazi you look very relaxed. What’s up?Sazi : I am. We have some free time today.Rasuni : Wow, great! Then we can play some game, can’t we Yoga?Yoga : Of course, we can. I'd love to have some free time.Ganeshan : Freedom is valuable but there are more valuable things.Yoga : What? I can’t find anything more valuable than freedom.Sazi : How about wealth?Gamika : No, it is not. It is a temporary thing. I think health is more valuable than wealth.Ganeshan : How about nature as a whole?Rasuni : In a way nature covers many things and we can say it is important.Ganeshan : Well, I think what we value most depends on how we look at it.

Activity 09

Speaking and Writing

9.1 What do you think is the most valuable thing in the world? Why?

9.2 List out the things that are most valuable to you and give reasons.

Activity 10

Speaking

Sazi got the following statements from her elder sister who got it from an email. Read them and discuss it with your friends.

109For free distribution

• The most selfish 1 letter word...... "I" - Avoid It• The most satisfying 2 letter word..... "We" - Use it• The most poisonous 3 letter word.... "Ego" - Kill It• The most used 4 letter word..... "Love" - Value it• The most pleasing 5 letter word..... "Smile" - Keep it• The fastest spreading 6 letter word.... "Rumour" - Ignore it• The hardest working 7 letter word.... "Success" - Achieve it• The most enviable 8 letter word..... "Jealousy" - Distance it• The most powerful 9 letter word..... "Knowledge" - Acquire it• The most essential 10 letter word.... "Confidence" - Trust it

Activity 11

Imagine that you are having a panel discussion. There will be a presenter and other speakers. Now get in to groups of five or six and take each of the above points and reason out why you agree/disagree with them. You can use the following expressions and questions.

• I would like to introduce ………. • Today here with us…...• I’m sure you’ll have a ...… • Today our discussion is ……… • I think …… • Because… • We must …… • As ……• How can knowledge be powerful?• Do you think…? • Is it easy to ….? • How do you react to a rumour?

Activity 12

Yoga highlights that nature is the most valuable thing. She wanted to send an email to Sazi’s sister mentioning the value of trees. Look at the following email and write a reply to Yoga.

110For free distribution

Dear sister,

Thank you for your email. I am searching for some information about rare and valuable trees. If you find any please forward it to me.

Thanks with regards, Yoga.

Information on trees

ruchi@mail.com

Hi Ruchi

Activity 13

13.1 Match the question words with the phrases.

● What is the give a valid reason?● Why do you think like that?● How can think that others will agree with your idea?● What makes you prove it?● Can you most valuable thing in the world?● Do you you say so?

13.2 Go round the class, asking your friends the above questions and note down their responses. Record the details in a chart or graph and write a small report on what they consider as most valuable things. You may begin like this,

A class survey was done to find out the views of students of Grade 10 class on the most valuable things. ....…. Students bare the idea that….

Activity 14

Read the following poem and answer the questions.

111For free distribution

HUMAN VALUES

In the speedy materialistic race, We have forgot our grace, We are running behind the glitters, Due to which everyone suffers, In going ahead with one another, we are pushing each other, We have no human values, only cry and hues, we have no heart, only the artto cheat and to deceiveWe can`t bear, the progress of otherwe, we, and only we

Dr. Ram Sharma

1. What is valued most by the poet? Quote the relevant lines.

2. Comment on the following lines. we are pushing each other, we have no human values,

3. What are the human values you have identified?