i

Catholicism

Grade 9

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2017

Second Print - 2018

Third Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0566-9

Published by : Educational Publications Department

Printed by : Sisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd. No. 110, Pagoda Road, Pitakotte.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

Foreword

With the continuous advancement of the world, the education sector too is transformed. Therefore, if we require the creation of a student community who could confront the future challenges successfully, our learning teaching process must constantly utilize effective approaches. It is our responsibility to disseminate the knowledge of the new world while assisting to create global citizens with good values. Our department is actively engaged in producing learning tools with the great aim of contributing to enlighten the minds of the children of the country.

A textbook is a repository of knowledge. At times, it takes us to a world of entertainment while developing our critical thinking faculties. It promotes our hidden potentials. In the coming years, the memories related to these textbooks will bring you happiness. While making the maximum use of this valuable learning tool, you must essentially access other useful knowledge spaces too. I wish that you would gain the ability to enlighten the future as citizens with knowledge and values by using this textbook.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the panels of writers, editors and reviewers as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department for the contribution made on this endeavor.

P.N. Ilapperuma,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications DepartmentIsurupaya,Battaramulla.26.06.2020

v

Monitoring and Supervision

P. N. Ilapperuma - Commissioner General of Educational Publications

Direction

W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination

R.D. Wijewickrama - Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

S.G.D.N.L. Samarakoon - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Advisory Board

Most Rev. Dr. Oswald Gomis

Rt. Rev. Dr. Maxwell Silva

Very Rev. Fr. Daya Shelton Welikadaarachchi

Editor

Very Rev. Fr. Piyal Janaka Fernando - National Chatechetical Director, No: 19 Balcombe place, Colombo 8

Panel of Writers

Rev. Sister Mary Nimalka - Teacher, St. Joseph's Boys' College, Nugegoda.

S.G.K.D.L.C. Prasad - Deputy Principal, St. Joseph's Boys' College, Colombo 14 Marini Dhammika Perera - I. S. A. Divisional Education office, Colombo North, Maligawatta, Colombo 10

vi

Dushmanthi Daya Kumari - I.S.A. , Zonal Education Office,De Silva Minuwangoda

W.K.M.I.S.K. Fernando - I.S.A. (retired)

Transalation

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya.

Language Editor

Rev. Fr. M.G.L. Fernando - Assistant Director of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya

Computer Type setting

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya.

Page Layout and Cover Page

L.A. Sanduni Nilanka Pathmasiri - Computer Unit Educational Publications Department

vii

CONTENTS

Page

The Holy Bible1. Classification of the Old Testament Books 12. Classification of the New Testament Books 53. The Book of Psalms 74. Synoptic Gospels 125. The Gospel of St. John 15

Faith in the Holy Trinity6. Fall of Man to Sin 187. Cain and Abel 238. Flood and the Covenant with Noah 279. The Judges 3310. The Kings 38

Strength For the life of Faith11. Righteous Life 4412. Conversion 4913. Sacrament of Reconciliation 5314. Sacrament of the Anointing of the sick 5815. The Rite of the Anointing of the Sick 62

Living the life of Faith16. Protect One’s life 6817. Protecting the Lives of Others 7218. Do Not Commit Adultery 7819. You shall not Covet Your Neighbour’s Wife 8120. Exemplary Lives 83

Life of Prayer21. What is Asked in Prayer will be given 8722. Ask Good Things in Prayer 9123. The Canticles 9324. Types of Prayer 9725. AsIPA 100

viii

1

Teacher : Our first lesson is the “Classification of the Old Testament Books.”

Noel : Yes, teacher, There are 46 books.

Teacher : Very good, Noel.

We can divide these 46 books into various groups. As a result, it is easy to study. Children, who can read Psalm 119:105?

Danuka : “Thy word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.”

Teacher : Very good. Somebody else may read Numbers 6:24-26.

Shehan : The LORD bless you and keep you; the LORD make his face to shine upon you, and be gracious to you; the LORD lift up his countenance upon you, and give you peace.

Teacher : Dear children, we should be able to turn the books of the Bible

quickly. We have to read the Word of God and understand. Now let us identify the Books of the Old Testament. Let us turn to the Bible and know them. Let us understand the meaning of the Word of God, found in these books.

There are 46 books in the Old Testament of the Bible. These books can be classifiedinto five sections. They are: 1. The Pentateuch 2. The Historical Books 3. The Wisdom Literature 4. The Prophetic Literature 5. The Apocalyptic Literature

1

Classification of the Old Testament Books

2

The first five books of the Holy Bible are called, “Pentateuch.”

The Pentateuch1. Genesis 2. Exodus3. Leviticus4. Numbers5. Deuteronomy

5

The second section is the “Historical Books.” There are 16 of them.

The Historical Books1. Joshua 2. Judges3. Ruth4. 1 Samuel5. 2 Samuel6. 1 Kings7. 2 Kings8. 1 Chronicles9. 2 Chronicles10. Ezra11. Nehemiah12. Tobit13. Judith14. Esther15. 1 Maccabees16. 2 Maccabees

16

3

The third group is the “Wisdom Literature. There are 7 of them.

The Wisdom Literature1. Job 2. Psalms3. Proverbs4. Ecclesiastes5. Song of Songs6. Wisdom7. Sirach

7

The fourth group is the “Prophetic Literature.” There are 17 of them.

The Prophetic Literature1. Isaiah 2. Jeremiah3. Lamentations4. Baruch5. Ezekiel6. Hosea7. Joel8. Amos9. Obadiah10. Jonah11. Micah12. Nahum13. Habakkuk14. Zephaniah15. Haggai16. Zechariah17. Malachi

17

4

Activity

1. Name the five books of the Pentateuch.2. Name five Historical Books.3. Name five books that belong to the category of the Wisdom

Literature.4. Name five books that belong to the category of the Prophetic

Literature.5. Name the only book that belongs to the category of the Apocalyptic

Literature of the Old Testament.

The fifth group is the “Apocalyptic Literature.” Only one book belongs to this group.

The Apocalyptic Literature1. Daniel

1

For Life³³ Buy a Holy Bible to your house.

³³ Study the order of the books.

5

Classification of the New Testament Books2

There are 27 books in the New Testament. They can be divided into three groups:

1. The Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles2. The Epistles3. The Apocalyptic Literature

1. The Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles

This group has five books:

1. The Gospel of St. Matthew2. The Gospel of St. Mark3. The Gospel of St. Luke4. The Gospel of St. John5. The Acts of the Apostles

The four gospels contain some of the teachings and miracles of Lord Jesus.

The Acts of the Apostles present how the first Christian community started and flourished after Lord Jesus Christ. It speaks specially about the acts of St. Peter and St. Paul, two apostles.

Since the teachings of Lord Jesus are found in the Gospels, they are very important for our day-to-day life. They have to be read and meditated daily. Subsequently, we will be able to turn the necessary books of the Holy Bible and Scripture passages quickly, when it is necessary.

2. The Epistles

There are 21 Epistles:

1. Romans 2. 1 Corinthians 3. 2 Corinthians 4. Galatians 5. Ephesians 6. Philippians 7. Colossians 8. 1 Thessalonians 9. 2 Thessalonians 10. 1 Timothy 11. 2 Timothy 12. Titus

6

13. Philemon 14. Hebrews 15. James 16. 1 Peter 17. 2 Peter 18. 1 John 19. 2 John 20. 3 John 21. Jude

3. The Apocalyptic Literature

The one and only book in the New Testament which belongs to the Apocalyptic Literature is the Book of Revelation. This was written to strengthen the faith of the Christians who had to undergo persecutions. This book was written in symbolic language. We know that even today many Christians have to face persecutions. Let us pray for them so that they may be faithful to their faith. Thereby let us help them. Let us also make a firm decision that we will never betray our faith. Let us be strengthened by the Word of God to do so.

1. Name the four Gospels.2. Name five Epistles, found in the New Testament.3. Name the only book that belongs to the category of the Apocalyptic

Literature of the New Testament.

For LifeThe teachings in the New Testament are very important to our Christian lives. Therefore, let us read and meditate them daily. Let us strengthen our faith. Let us also respect and love for the Word of God. Let us have a good understanding of the books of the New Testament. As a result, we may be able to use the New Testament easily.

Activity

7

The Book of Psalms3

I lift up my eyes to the hills from where will my help come?My help comes from the LORD, who made heaven and earth.

He will not let your foot be moved; he who keeps you will not slumber. He who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.

The LORD is your keeper; the LORD is your shade at your right hand.The sun shall not strike you by day, nor the moon by night.

The LORD will keep you from all evil; he will keep your life.The LORD will keep your going out and your coming in from this time on and forevermore. (Psalms 121)

The Book of Psalms is a book of the Holy Bible with 150 hymns. Each of them was sung, using a stringed musical instrument. They were sung with joy, praising God’s goodness. Yet, there are hymns, sung with sadness, lamentation or contrition. There are also hymns, sung during illness and bad experience. More than any other books of the Holy Bible, this book speaks about the experience of God in ordinary life. This book is known as “Book of Praises” and “Psalter.” It is the prayer book in the Holy Bible.

The authorship of the Psalter is attributed to King David. However, all do not agree about King David’s authorship due to different language styles, its contents and time. The background of the book is the worship and homage, paid to God by the Israelites.

8

The Psalter has five books. (The Pentateuch also has five books.)

First Book - Psalms 1-41Second Book - Psalms 42-72Third Book - Psalms 73-89Fourth Book - Psalms 90-106Fifth Book - Psalms 107-150

The last verse of each book is prayerful. Each book ends with praise to God.

Ex. Psalm 41:13 Psalm 72:19 Psalm 89:52 Psalm 106:48 Psalm 150

Classification of the Psalms

1. Hymns of Praise

These hymns speak about God’s creation and salvation and God’s features, such as goodness, mercy, love, greatness, royalty. E.g. Psalm 8, 112, 145-150.

O' LORD, our Sovereign, how majestic is your name in all the earth!You have set your glory above the heavens. (Psalm 8:1)

2. Lament Psalms

These hymns are called by this name, because they were sung during times of difficulties and distress, asking God’s help. These hymns can be divided into two:

i. Personal Lament Psalms (Psalm 3, 5, 6, 7, 13, 140)ii. Communal Lament Psalms (Psalm 44, 74, 79, 80, 83)

9

I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my supplications, O' LORD.O' GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in the day of battle. (Psalm 140:6-7)

3. Thanksgiving Psalms

They were sung with gratitude to God for the graces and benefits, received. E.g. Psalms 18, 105 and 116

O give thanks to the LORD, for he is good,for his steadfast love endures forever. (Psalm 136:1)

4. Wisdom Psalms

These psalms encourage the people to lead a righteous life. E.g. Psalms 1, 73 and 133

Happy are those who do not follow the advice of the wicked,or take the path that sinners tread, or sit in the seat of scoffers; but their delight is in the law of the LORD, and on his law they meditate day and night. (Psalm 1:1-2)

5. Royal Psalms

These psalms were sung during the consecration or weddings of kings. E.g. Psalms 2, 45 and 72

10

Give the king your justice, O' God,and your righteousness to a king’s son. (Psalm 72:1)

6. Psalms of Zion

Zion is Jerusalem. These Psalms speak of the greatness of Jerusalem. They were used in pilgrimages to Jerusalem. E.g. Psalms 46, 48, 122 and 125

Those who trust in the LORD are like Mount Zion,which cannot be moved, but abides forever. (Psalm 125:1)

7. Psalms of Trust

These speak of firm faith on God. Trusting in God, these Psalms were sung. E.g. Psalms 23, 62 and 71

Even though I walk through the darkest valley,I fear no evil;for you are with me;your rod and your staffthey comfort me. (Psalm 23:4)

Psalter is a treasure of prayer. It is the best proof that the Israelites experienced God in their ordinary life. They brought all their life experience to God in prayer.

11

Lord Jesus has quoted from Psalms. He used psalms in the Sermon on the Mount. E.g. Psalm 6:9 (Matthew 7:23), Psalm 24:3-4 (Matthew 5:8), Psalm 37:11 (Matthew 5:5). Lord Jesus used Psalm 22:1 on the cross.

In happiness and win, we praise God and in pain and distress, we appeal to God: we ask His help. When we fall into sin, we are contrite. We go back to God; ask pardon. We take all these to God in prayer, using psalms.

We use psalms in the Responsorial Psalms of the Holy Mass, the highest act of liturgy. In the Liturgy of the Hours and the Vespers, Palter is indispensible.

Therefore, the Psalter has being in use from ancient times to present day. It is a prayer book that helps to lift the heart of the faithful to God.

1. Get a psalm of your choice from the Psalter and write it in your

exercise book.2. Display a psalm on your Wallpaper.3. Write an essay of 100 words on the topic, “Psalter is our prayer

book.” 4. Compose a hymn, praising God.

For Life

Make use of the Psalter for your prayer.

Activity

12

Synoptic Gospels4

Sandali : Mother, Rebecca of our class has written a beautiful poem about Lord Jesus and it is in the Children’s corner of the Catholic Messenger. Look, it is very nice.

Mother : What a good thing.

Sandali : Mother, I too like to know about Lord Jesus. I want to know teachings of Lord Jesus, how He healed the sick, etc.

Mother : If so, you have to read the Gospels. It is the best way to know about Lord Jesus.

Sandali : Will I be able to finish it?

Mother : Why not? First read the synoptic Gospels.

Sandali : What do you mean by “Synoptic Gospels?” I have not heard such a word.

Mother : Well, I will tell you, what “Synoptic Gospels” are.

There are three synoptic Gospels. They are:

1. The Gospel of St. Matthew 2. The Gospel of St. Mark 3. The Gospel of St. Luke

St. Mark

St. MatthewSt. Luke

13

These Gospels are called by that name, because there are many similarities among them. These three evangelists present information about Lord Jesus in a more or less similar manner.

The synoptic Gospels present Lord Jesus’ baptism in a similar manner. The following quotations testify to that fact:

And a voice from heaven said, “This is my Son, the Beloved, with whom I am well pleased.” (Matthew 3:17)And a voice came from heaven, “You are my Son, the Beloved; with you I am well pleased.” (Mark 1:11)And a voice came from heaven, “You are my Son, the Beloved; with you I am well pleased.” (Luke 3:22)

We lernt about the Gospel of St. Luke in grade eight. From this lesson, let's learn about another two Gospels, St. Matthews and St. Mark.

The Gospel of St. Matthew

Author : St. Matthew, the apostle.

Time : 80-90 A.D.

Purpose : Jesus is the New Moses and the New Messianic Teacher.

Other Names: The Gospel of the Kingdom of

God. The Gospel of the Church.

Picture 4.1 - St. Matthew

14

The Gospel of St. Mark

Author : St. Mark.

Time : 64-66 A.D.

Purpose : To strengthen the faith of the first Christians, who were persecuted under the Roman emperor, Nero. Other Names : The Gospel of Passion.

In the same way, we should be courageous to witness to Lord Jesus Christ in the face of various challenges. We have to imitate St. Mark’s Christian community who were faithful to their faith in the face of persecutions, launched by the Roman emperor. Daily we must to respond to the challenges that come in our way.

God has given us so many talents. For them, we should be grateful to Him. Like the evangelists, we should make use of our talents to spread the Good News.

1. Name the synoptic Gospels.2. Write two other names, used to the Gospel of St. Matthew.3. Write the purpose of writing the Gospel of St. Mark.

For LifeLet us witness to Lord Jesus Christ in the face of challenges.

Activity

Picture 4.1 - St. Mark

15

The Gospel of St. John5

Author : St. John, the apostle.

Time : 90-100 A.D.

Purpose : To prove that Lord Jesus is the Son of God and by believing in Him that you may have Eternal Life. Other Names : The Spiritual Gospel.

1. “I am the bread of life” (John 6:35)

Lord Jesus is the real food that gives us the Eternal Life. He is really present in the Eucharist. Therefore, we have to receive the Eucharist with respect and love. When we receive the Eucharist regularly, our spiritual life is nourished.

2. “I am the light of the world.” (John 8:12)

It is clear from the Gospels how Lord Jesus became a light to all. Not only by word, but also by deed and life, He became a light. Where there is light, there is no place for darkness. To live in light, one has to be free from sin. We must try to be the children of light.

3. “I am the gate for the sheep.” (John 10:7)

We are the sheep of Lord Jesus, the shepherd. We have to enter the Eternal Life through Lord Jesus, the gate for the sheep.

Picture 5.1 - St. John

16

4. “I am the good shepherd.” (John 10:11)

The shepherd goes in front of the sheep and leads them. He does so in order to give the necessary protection and to lead in the necessary direction. As a good shepherd, Lord Jesus Christ guides us. We have to be His obedient and good sheep.

Picture 5.2 - Good Shepherd

5. “I am the resurrection and the life. (John 11:25)

Lord Jesus not only gives life, but also gives us a life that cannot be conquered by death. Just as He overcame death and resurrected, he will raise us to Eternal Life. In view of the life after death, we have to lead a good life.

6. “I am the way, and the truth, and the life.” (John 14:6)

One who knows the way, knows the truth and has life can show the way, tell the truth and gives life to others. Lord Jesus knows the way which leads to God. He is the truth. If we believe in Him, we can attain Eternal Life. By going on the way (the doctrine), showed by Him, we can witness to the truth.

17

7. “I am the true vine.” (John 15:1)

If the branches of the vine to bear fruit, they have to get water and nourishment from the vine. Lord Jesus is the true vine. If we are to bear fruit, we have to be grafted to the vine. We have to be the branches of the true vine, Lord Jesus.

1. Write two purposes of writing the Gospel of St. John.2. Write three “I am” sayings, found in the fourth Gospel.3. Basing on your experiences, write ten sentences on “I am the good

shepherd.”

For Life

Let us try to be the good sheep of the good shepherd.

Activity

18

Fall of Man to Sin6

Basuru is a good student in Grade 9, who loves God, the Father. He was being praised by all, because of his good qualities. They often advised others, saying: “Look at Basuru, he is a good student. You should be like him. You are a bad lot. You do not follow our instructions. You are senseless.”

Some of the students, who were regularly blamed by the Principal and the teachers, decided to mislead Basuru. After school, on the way home, they showed beautiful scenes from the mobile telephone to Basuru. They compelled him to watch good scenes first and then bad scenes. Finally he got addicted to the mobile phones.

He not only failed at exams, but also he was despised by many. All abandoned him. Then he remembered the loving God, the Father. He met the Parish Priest and made a good confession. Having listened to his advice and got his blessings, he decided to live a good life. He made a firm decision not to do any wrong afterwards.

³ ³ ³ ³ ³ ³ ³ ³ ³ ³

God, the Father settled Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden so that they may cultivate and look after it. He gave a commandment to live in that garden:

Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall die. (Genesis 2:17)

This shows that He is a loving father and He gives us advice to lead a good life. He speaks to us especially through our conscience. Therefore, we should listen to the divine voice within us.

19

Picture 6.1 - Falling of Adam and Eve into sin

Man and woman lived in the Garden. They had enough food. They lived happily because they were in friendship with God. The serpent was cunning more than any other animal. It tempted the woman. It questioned from the woman whether God forbade eating any of the trees in the Garden. She said that they can eat from any tree except the tree in the middle and that if they ate, they would definitely die. Yet, the serpent said that they would not die, and instead their eyes would be opened and would see that they were equal to God, and would be able to know good and bad.

Having listened to the serpent’s misleading words, she thought that the fruit would be tasty and would give intelligence. She ate some fruits and gave some to the husband and he too ate them.

This shows how Adam and Eve fell into sin. Even if we are not close to God, the Satan may tempt us as he tempted Adam and Eve. Especially we must listen to the conscience when we are tempted. We have to overcome temptations. We have to follow Lord Jesus, who overcame temptations.

20

Punishments as consequences of sin(Genesis 3:14-19

To the Serpent1. Curse2. All through life creeping

To Eve1. Increase pans in child bearing2. In pains brings forth children3. Though desire for husband, he will rule over her

To Adam1. Cursing of the ground2. In toil he shall eat all the days of his life3. Thorns and thistles earth shall bring forth4. Eat the plants of the field5. By the sweat, he shall eat bread until he return to the ground, for out of it he was taken; he was dust, and to dust he would return.

God punished the first parents not out of anger but out of love. We have to understand that when we do a wrong, even our parents punish us out of love.

21

Even though Adam and Eve were disobedient to God, God was merciful to them and gave a promise of salvation. God, who loved the fallen man unceasingly, promised to send a saviour to save man from sin. That promise is found in Genesis 3:15:

I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will strike your head, and you will strike his heel. (Genesis 3:15)

In this promise, the offspring of the woman is humanity. The serpent is the Satan. There is an eternal enmity between man and the devil.

In the phrase “he will strike your head,” “he” means Lord Jesus, the Saviour of the world. God so loved the disobedient man that He promised to send a saviour to redeem man.

And the LORD God made garments of skins for the man and for his wife, and clothed them. (Genesis 3:21)

Making of garments of skin shows the love and protection of God. In the face of human weaknesses, God shows His mercy towards us. Therefore, we too should be merciful to others.

22

1. Write three guidelines that you give to your friend in the

school, who has gone astray.2. Write how you overcame one of the temptations that you

faced.3. Write Genesis 3:15 and one of messages that can be derived

from it.4. Describe three instances that you showed mercy to others as

God showed mercy to Adam and Eve.

For Life

²² Let us always listen to God’s voice.

²² Let us overcome temptations.

²² Let us share divine mercy with others.

Activity

23

Cain and Abel7

Adam and Eve had two sons, namely Cain and Abel. Abel was a shepherd. Cain was a farmer. After some time, Cain made an offering to God out of the harvest that he made from the ground. Abel offered the firstlings of his flock. God accepted Abel and his offering, but not Cain and his offering. Therefore, Cain got angry and he was jealous of Abel. Hence, God advised Cain:

The LORD said to Cain, “Why are you angry, and why has your countenance fallen? If you do well, will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well, sin is lurking at the door; its desire is for you, but you must master it. (Genesis 4:6-7)

When Cain learnt that God was pleased with his brother, Abel, he was jealous and furious. When God learnt that Cain was full of evil and going astray, He advised Cain and instructed to do away his evil intentions and become a good person. If he tried to be good, God promised that He too would help him.

Picture 7.1 - Cain’s and Abel’s Offerings

24

When we do wrong, God advises us through various persons. Such persons are religious leaders, parents, teachers and elders. We must listen to those who guide us in the correct path.

Picture 7.2 - Cain has killed Abel

Cain said to his brother Abel, “Let us go out to the field.” And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and killed him. (Genesis 4:8)

The act of killing Abel by Cain shows that man sinned against fraternal love. Full of jealousy, Cain went against fraternal love and killed his brother. As children of God, we have to live in fraternal love. We should not be jealous of others. We should be happy, when others make various achievements. We have to protect the lives of others.

God questioned Cain who fell into sin in spite of His advice:

God : Where is your brother Abel?

Cain : I do not know; am I my brother’s keeper?

God : What have you done? Listen; your brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground!

25

These are the punishments and the consequences of sin that Cain received:

1. He became a cursed person2. Dispelled from the ground3. When he tilled the ground, it would no longer yield to him its strength.4. He would be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth.

When Cain was questioned about Abel, he says that he was ignorant of him: “I do not know.” He lied. This shows that he has become stubborn as a result of sin. Even though man sins on the sly, it cannot be hidden from God. Even though God punished Cain, He showed mercy towards him. The following passage testifies to that:

Cain said to the LORD, “My punishment is greater than I can bear! Today you have driven me away from the soil, and I shall be hidden from your face; I shall be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth, and anyone who meets me may kill me.” Then the LORD said to him, “Not so! Whoever kills Cain will suffer a sevenfold vengeance.” And the LORD put a mark on Cain, so that no one who came upon him would kill him. (Genesis 4:13-15)

According to the above Bible passage, the one, who kills Cain, will get a sevenfold punishment. This shows that even the life of the sinner belongs to God. We cannot take a life of an offender. We cannot judge others. The sign, put on Cain, was a sign of protection, but not of a punishment. This shows that the sinner, who prays to God, will receive God’s mercy. We should keep away from sin, i.e. jealousy, envy, murder, etc. We must live with fraternal love.

26

1. Write three guidelines that you get from the story of Cain

and Abel.2. Write four groups of people who guide us when we do wrong.3. Write three things that help us to overcome jealousy.

For Life

³³ Do not be jealous of others.

³³ Listen to those who guide us on the correct path.

³³ Always live in fraternal love.

Activity

27

Flood and the Covenant

with Noah8

Now the earth was corrupt in God’s sight, and the earth was filled with violence. And God saw the earth, and behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted their way upon the earth. (Genesis 6:11-12)

The above quotation shows that the cause of the flood was the wickedness of man. Due to sin, God was sorry, and therefore, He was going to punish man. The pinnacle of the creation is the man and man’s sin has influenced the whole creation negatively.

And God said to Noah, “I have determined to make an end of all flesh; for the earth is filled with violence through them; behold, I will destroy them with the earth. (Genesis 6:13)

8.1 Picture - Noah’s Ark

28

The above quotation shows that the purpose of the flood is not to destroy man, but to destroy the sin, spread on earth by man.

Theft

Character Assassination

Abortion

Child Abuse

Unsuitable Affairs

Sinful acts in the present society

DrugsVengeance

RevengeWar

Jealousy Bribe

Murder

Watching Phonograph

The above diagram shows the sinful acts in the present society. All these have a destructive repercussion on the whole of the creation. Think, what can be done to eliminate these sinful acts. We have to shun away from sinful acts.

29

8.2 Picture - Noah with his sons

But Noah found favor in the eyes of the LORD. … Noah was a righteous man, blameless in his generation; Noah walked with God. And Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. (Genesis 6:8-10)

Although the sin increased and its destructive influence became the rule of the day, God made available new ways of redemption. Though God decided to destroy the creation, which was affected by sin, the act of choosing Noah, his family and the representatives of the animals shows His mercy. Thus, Noah is selected as a beginner of a new creation. He was chosen because of his goodness.

Just as Noah, we must live as righteous people. We must be sincere. Just as Noah, we have to live a righteous life. Then we will be at the disposal of God’s mercy.

30

8.3 Picture - Flood

In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on that day all the fountains of the great deep burst forth, and the windows of the heavens were opened. (Genesis 7:11)

The promise, given to Noah was realized as it was said. Noah was safe from the flood.

From the Holy Bible, it is clear that because of Noah’s great qualities, he was favourable in the sight of God and he became a friend of God. We can have the inspiration from the life of Noah how we are to live in order to receive God’s mercy.

And when the LORD smelled the pleasing odor, the LORD said in his heart, “I will never again curse the ground because of man, for the imagination of man’s heart is evil from his youth; neither will I ever again destroy every living creature as I have done. (Genesis 8:21)

31

God decided not to destroy the whole world once again by flood and gave a promise. It is evident from the Bible quotation, below. The mercy of God is also evident. It is an affirmation that divine protection and providence will be available to the future generations.

I will remember my covenant that is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall never again become a flood to destroy all flesh. (Genesis 9:15)

8.4 Picture - After the flood

And God said, “This is the sign of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for all future generations: I set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. (Genesis 9:12-13)

God made a covenant with the whole creation. Sign of affirming the covenant was the “rainbow” (bow). It was a unilateral covenant.

32

For Life

³³ Refuse sin.

³³ Fulfil the promises, given to others.

³³ Be honest.

1. Write five things that you take as a student to eradicate sinful acts in

the society.2. Write three things that you do to show the divine mercy to others.3. Write in the Table how you are going to fulfil the promises, given to

your parents, teachers and friends.

ParentsTeachersFriends

1 .........................2 .........................3 .........................

1 .........................2 .........................3 .........................

1 .........................2 .........................3 .........................

4. Write three examples that you are to imitate from the life of Noah.

Rainbow is a sign of the end of flood. So it is a sign of divine providence. In the Old Testament, rainbow was a sign of divine sympathy, mercy and love. God rebuilds the relationship with man by the promise of not destroying the world by flood. Rainbow was the external sign of the covenant with Noah.

God has fulfilled the promises of covenant with Noah. In the same way, we have to fulfill the promises, given to others in the home, school and the parish.

Activity

33

The Judges9

After the redemption from slavery in Egypt, Israelites came to the Promised Land. After they settled there, they had to face many difficulties and oppression, brought about by other nations. To protect Israelites from various foreign invasions and influences, God sent Judges, who were war heroes. The Book of Judges has to say this about appointing of Judges (heroes):

Then the LORD raised up judges, who delivered them out of the power of those who plundered them. (Judges 2:16)

The period of Israelite Judges was from 1200-1050 B.C. One of the characteristic of the Judges was that their rule was not for the whole of Israelites. Their duty was to gather the Israelites together and take the leadership in wars that were against Israelites.

Whenever the LORD raised up judges for them, the LORD was with the judge, and he delivered them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge; for the LORD would be moved to pity by their groaning because of those who persecuted and oppressed them. But whenever the judge died, they would relapse and behave worse than their ancestors, following other gods, worshipping them and bowing down to them. They would not drop any of their practices or their stubborn ways. (Judges 2:18-19)

Thus it is clear that they were appointed not only to protect Israelites but also to be with Israelites and to work for their salvation. There are twelve such war heroes in the Holy Bible. They are:

34

1. Othniel 5. Gideon 9. Ibzan 2. Ehud 6. Tola 10. Elon 3. Shamgar 7. Jair 11. Abdon 4. Deborah 8. Jephthah 12. Samson

Deborah, the heroine

She was an intelligent woman. During her time, a Canaanite king harassed the Israelites. Therefore, the Israelites prayed to God. According to the advice of Deborah, Barak led an army of ten thousand against the Canaanite army. When Canaanites learnt that Barak came to the Mount Tabor, they were ready to fight. Deborah encouraged Barak, the commander in chief of Israelite army to fight against the Canaanite army. Due to grace of God, The Israelite army won the war. Deborah explained that the victory is not of the Israelite army but that of God.

Gideon, the Hero

After a peace period of forty years, Israelites had to undergo persecutions from the Midianites as a punishment for their sins. Since they prayed to God for deliverance, Gideon was called.

9.2 Picture - Gideon, the Hero

9.1 Picture - Deborah, the heroine

35

The angel of the LORD appeared to him and said to him, “The LORD is with you, you mighty warrior.” Then the LORD turned to him and said, “Go in this might of yours and deliver Israel from the hand of Midian; I hereby commission you. (Judges 6:12, 6:14)

Gideon destroyed all the alters, made by the Israelite for the false gods and gathered people for the war against the Midianites. However, he limited the army to 300 as directed by God. According to the advice of Gideon, the army went to the Midian camp, and broke the jars, holding in their left hands the torches, and in their right hands the trumpets to blow. The God set every man’s sword against his fellow and all killed each other.

Samuel, the Judge

9.3 Picture - Samuel, the Judge

36

Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. He went on a circuit year by year to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all these places. Then he would come back to Ramah, for his home was there; he administered justice there to Israel, and built there an altar to the LORD. (1 Samuel 7:15-17)

Samuel was

³³ the last judge

³³ the first prophet

³³ a priest

³³ the one who consecrated Saul and David as kings

9.4 Picture - Samuel consecrates Saul9.5 Picture - Samuel consecrates David

37

1. Name the twelve heroes.2. What was the main duty of the heroes?3. Write three things that you can do for the betterment of others.

For Life

Work for the betterment of others

The heroes give the following examples to our lives:

³³ Work for the betterment of others

³³ Help when others are in need

³³ Pray to God when others are in problematic situations

³³ Believe that God is with us

Activity

38

The Kings10

When Israelites had to face various challenges, they felt that they had to organize themselves under a powerful king. They also felt that there was a need of a leader, who could unite the isolated tribes and form a great nation. They informed this idea to Samuel, who was in his old age. They insisted that they need a king. At the beginning Samuel was against this request. However, because of the persistent request, God asked Samuel to appoint a king.

Then all the elders of Israel gathered together and came to Samuel at Ramah, and said to him, “You are old and your sons do not follow in your ways; appoint for us, then, a king to govern us, like other nations.” But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, “Give us a king to govern us.” Samuel prayed to the LORD, and the LORD said to Samuel, “Listen to the voice of the people in all that they say to you; for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected me from being king over them. Just as they have done to me, from the day I brought them up out of Egypt to this day, forsaking me and serving other gods, so also they are doing to you. Now then, listen to their voice; only you shall solemnly warn them, and show them the ways of the king who shall reign over them.” (1 Samuel 8:4-9)

39

King Saul

The first king of Israel was Saul. He was the son of Kish of the tribe of Benjamin. He had a unique personality and was young. He went in search of the donkeys, which had strayed. Meanwhile he met Samuel by chance. The following passage elaborates the anointing of Saul as king as instructed by God:

Samuel took a vial of oil and poured it on his head, and kissed him; he said, “The LORD has anointed you ruler over his people Israel. You shall reign over the people of the LORD and you will save them from the hand of their enemies all around. Now this shall be the sign to you that the LORD has anointed you ruler over his heritage: (1 Samuel 10:1)

On hearing that Nahash, the king of Ammonites was ready to make a treaty by gouging out everyone’s right eye, Soul united all the people of Judah to wage a war against Nahash. Saul won the war.

After that he had to face great challenges from the Philistines. Because of a shrewd act of Jonathan, the son of Saul, the army of Philistines was defeated. However, Saul had to fight with Philistines throughout his reign. Later on he established a great army.

As the first king, he defeated the enemies of Israelites. He pioneered in building a powerful kingdom by uniting the Israelites. Having fought with Philistines, Soul lost his life.

10.1 Picture - King Saul

40

King David

Since Saul disobeyed God, God ordered Samuel to appoint a new king. As guided by God, Samuel went to Jesse’s house in Bethlehem. Jesse belonged to the tribe of Judah. He was to select one of his sons. Looking at the eldest son, he thought he was the suitable person, but God said: “Do not look at his appearance or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected him; for the LORD does not see as mortals see; they look on the outward appearance, but the LORD looks on the heart” (1 Samuel 16:7).

God instructed Samuel to anoint David:

Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the presence of his brothers; and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon David from that day onward. (1 Samuel 16:13)

Saul’s army was fighting vehemently with Philistines. David’s three brothers were in the army. One day Jesse sent David to see how his brothers fare. The leader of the Philistines was Goliath, a giant. He challenged that one of the Israelites should fight with him. Only David accepted the challenge. In the name of God, he came forward to fight against this giant. He took only his staff and five smooth stones.

10.2 Picture - King David

41

David said to the Philistine, “You come to me with sword and spear and javelin; but I come to you in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied. (1 Samuel 17:45)

Having run toward the Philistine, David put his hand in his bag, took out a stone, slung it, and struck the Philistine on his forehead; the stone sank into his forehead, and he fell face down on the ground. David grasped the sword of the Philistine, drew it out of its sheath, and cut off his head. When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. On that day they had a humiliating defeat.

Fall of David into sin

David sent someone to inquire about the woman. It was reported, “This is Bathsheba daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite.” So David sent messengers to get her. (2 Samuel 11:3-4)

He had an illegal affair with her. When she conceived, she told David: “I am pregnant.”

Nathan, the prophet explained his sin through a parable. He did it in a shrewd way and brought him back to the correct path. Just like Nathan, the prophet, we too must show the others the correct path and bring them back to the correct path.

David’s Contrition

David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the LORD.” Nathan said to David, “Now the LORD has put away your sin; you shall not die. (2 Samuel 12:13)

42

David accepted his sin immediately, and said: “I have sinned against the LORD.” This shows that he understood his sin and had contrition for his sins. He was humble enough to ask pardon for his sin. Having a contrite heart, he composed Psalm 51. Turn to the Holy Bible and read and meditate on it. We also should be contrite for our sins and overcome them.

King Solomon

10.3 Picture - King Solomon

After David, his son, Solomon, was anointed as the king. At the beginning of his reign, he built a beautiful Temple for God in Jerusalem.

Now the word of the LORD came to Solomon, “Concerning this house that you are building, if you will walk in my statutes, obey my ordinances, and keep all my commandments by walking in them, then I will establish my promise with you, which I made to your father David. I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.” So Solomon built the house, and finished it. (1 Kings 6:11-14)

43

1. Name the first three kings of Israel.2. Who built the Jerusalem Temple?3. Write two examples that can be imitated from the life of King

David.

For Life³³ Be exemplary leaders.

Jerusalem Temple was magnificent. It took seven years to build. After it was over, the king consecrated it solemnly.

Kings, Saul, David and Solomon united Israel. They ruled the country as its lead-ers. We have been baptized and therefore we have to be exemplary leaders. When we fall into sin, we have to be contrite as King David. We must make a firm deci-sion to overcome sin.

Activity

44

Righteous Life11

Just like a tree which is well rooted to the ground, we too should be well rooted to a graceful life. Such a tree cannot be fallen by flood or cyclone. In the same way, well rooted graceful life cannot be destroyed by sin. Just like a tree that grows and bears fruits, if we live a righteous life, the graces that we receive bear fruit. All will benefit from such a life. Even if it is unprofitable, we are not reluctant to do away with sin.

At any time we can be tempted. To avoid temptations, the holy Catholic Church explains to us the sinful occasions. Let us recognize them.

Original Sin

Original sin is the guilt we inherit from our first parents. (Catholic Family Catechism 217)

Original sin is remitted by the Sacrament of Baptism.

11.1 Picture - Well rooted fruitful tree

45

Actual Sin

Actual sin is disobeying God’s command by thought, word, action or omission, with full knowl-edge and consent. (Catholic Family Catechism 217)

There are two kinds of actual sin, namely mortal sin and venial sin. Mortal sin is an offence against the law of God with full knowledge, consent in a grave matter.

1. Full Knowledge

The sins committed before seven years are not mortal sins, but venial sins.

2. Full Consent

A sin, committed due to force of someone, is not a mortal sin but a venial sin.

3. Grave Matter

For an example, a lie told as a joke is not a grave matter, but lie told in a court of law is a grave matter. Though a lie is said as a joke, it is wrong, i.e. venial sin.

4. Law of God

i.e. it is a sin against the Ten Commandment. Coming to school late is not a breach of the Ten Commandments, but refraining from attending Holy Mass on Sunday is against the Ten Commandment.

Effects of Venial SinsEffects of Mortal Sins

1. Though sanctifying grace is not

lost, spiritual life is weakened

1. Deprives the friendship of God

2. Weaken the ability to overcome

mortal sins

2. Death of the spiritual life

3. There will be temporary sadness

on earth or in purgatory

3. Deprives the soul of sanctifying

grace

46

One must avoid even venial sins. If one ignores fever, it may cause pneumonia and he may die. In the same way, if we take venial sins for granted, we may end up in a mortal sin, and as a result, our spiritual life may die. Sins are a result of capital sins. Capital sins are the source of many other sins and vices. There are seven of them. If one is to get rid of them they have to develop the seven virtues, opposed to the capital sins.

Capital sinsVirtues, that have to be developed

to get rid of capital sins

1. Pride (inordinate self-esteem

and ambition)

1. Humility (not boasting of one’s

capabilities and being humble)

2. Avarice (excessive craving

for worldly goods and money)

2. Generosity (being charitable)

3. Lust (uncontrolled sexual desire

and sexual pleasure)

3. Chastity (getting rid of lust)

4. Anger (unrestrained passion of displeasure)

4. Meekness (wishing the wellbeing of

others)

5. Gluttony (intemperance in

eating or drinking)

5. Temperance (getting rid of greed)

6. Envy (sorrow at another’s wellbeing)

6. Love (being happy at other’s

achievements)

7. Sloth (spiritual, mental or

physical laziness which causes neglect of duty)

7. Diligence (doing eagerly what has to be done)

The Four Sins that cry to heaven for vengeance

1. Wilful murder (including abortion)2. Sodomy3. Oppression of the poor4. Defrauding labourers of their wages

47

The Six Sins against the Holy Spirit

1. Presumption of God’s mercy2. Despair of salvation3. Resisting the known truths of religion4. Envy at another’s spiritual good5. Obstinacy in sin6. Final impenitence

(Catholic Family Catechism 227)

Divine Grace

Grace is a gift of God, granted to us through the merits of Lord Jesus Christ for our salvation. (Catholic Family Catechism 127)

Because of Divine Grace

³³ It paves the life of the Christian to a new path.

³³ The Person participates in divine life.

³³ The person gets graces to get rid of cravings.

There are two kinds of grace:

Sanctifying grace³³ is the gift of God that sanctifies our souls making us children of God and entitling us into heaven (Catholic Family Catechism128)

Actual grace³³ is the divine assistance given to us each time to avoid evil or to do good (Catholic Family Catechism129)

Divine Grace

48

To receive divine grace, we have to live a holy life. To live a holy life, we must be free from sin. For that the following can be done:

1. Prayer2. Good Works3. Receive Sacraments

By living a holy life, we can experience a life full of divine grace. Hence, we must always try to live such a life. To live a righteous life, pray to the Holy Spirit asking His grace. Let us also help others to live righteous lives.

1. Write separately what can be done to overcome each of

the Capital Sins.'

For Life“I have swept away your transgressions like a cloud, and your sins like mist; return to me, for I have redeemed you.” (Isaiah 44:22)

Activity

49

Conversion12

Read: Luke 15:11-32

In spite of father’s love, the younger son demanded and got his share of the property from the father and left the father in search of happiness and well being, but in a short time, all what he had was over. He lost his friends, happiness and well being, that he had looked for. Even having nothing to eat, he experienced the negative effects of sin. Then he came to his senses and recalled the love and mercy of the father, and the happiness and well being of the servants with the father. He had a conversion.

The son, who had left the father as a prince, returned home as a beggar. The father was waiting for the son’s return with conversion. Once the son returned, the father welcomed him in mercy. Having forgiven, the best robe was clothed; ring was put; and sandals were worn. Once again he was given the status of a prince.

This parable illustrates the love and mercy of God. It also invites us to be aware of sinful states; have a conversion; come back to God; get forgiveness and experience the divine love, mercy and wellbeing.

12.1 Picture - Lost Son, hugged by the Father

Parable of the Lost Son

50

The Parable of the Lost Coin

What woman having ten silver coins, if she loses one of them, does not light a lamp, sweep the house, and search carefully until she finds it? When she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, ‘Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I had lost.’ Just so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents. (Luke 15:8-10)

This parable shows that a woman, who has ten silver coins and loses even one of them, does not take it for granted, but looks for the lost one and when it is found, she is very happy. In the same way, God invites us to give up sinful ways and to experience divine love. It also shows how God is happy about the one, who is contrite for his sins and who is converted from sin. Therefore, we too must get converted and convert others from sin.

We have to believe that there is a loving Father who does not allow us to suffer by falling into sin and keeping away from divine love, but instead He comes in search of us.

The Woman Caught in Adultery

12.2 Picture - Lord Jesus forgave the woman caught in adultery

51

Read: John 8:1-11

According to the Law of Moses, one who commits adultery was to be stoned to death. Lord Jesus forgave even such a woman. Moreover, He said to her: “from now on do not sin again.”

We have to understand the sins that we have committed up to now, to be contrite for them, make a firm resolution not to do them once again, make a good confes-sion and get absolution from Lord Jesus.

St. Augustine

St. Augustine was born in Thagaste (now Algeria) in North Africa on the 13th of November 354 A.D. His father was Patricius. He was not a Christian. His mother was Monica, a Catholic. She became a saint and she is called, St. Monica. St. Augustine was a good orator and a lecturer. He went astray due to his bad habits.

His mother prayed to God with a firm faith for the conversion of her son. She asked the assistance of St. Ambrose in that endeavour. After a long time, he got converted because of¦

³³ His mother’s prayers

³³ St. Ambrose’s guidance

He was baptised at the age of 33 on an Easter Sunday amidst his mother’s happiness and praising of God. At that moment, his mother said: “Dear son, the only wish that I had all through my life was that you become a Christian. God has given more than what I wished. Let God be praised!”

Evil always leads us to wrong path. There are so many ways that lead us to temptations. Even the modern technology tempts us. We have to overcome temptations and free others also from temptations. For that, we must pray to the Holy Spirit. Let us follow the example, set by St. Monica.

12.3 Picture - St. Augustine

52

1. Write a hymn, used at the “Penitential Rite” of the Holy

Mass, and memorize it.2. Name two parables in the Holy Bible which affirm that sinner

is forgiven.3. Write a poem on “let us rebuild the relationship with God

once again.”

For Life³³ Memorize: “Jesus said, ‘Father, forgive them; for

they do not know what they are doing.’ ” (Luke 23:34)

Activity

53

Sacrament of Reconciliation13

Discipline yourselves, keep alert. Like a roaring lion your adversary the devil prowls around, looking for someone to devour. Resist him, steadfast in your faith, for you know that your brothers and sisters in all the world are undergoing the same kinds of suffering. And after you have suffered for a little while, the God of all grace, who has called you to his eternal glory in Christ, will himself restore, support, strengthen, and establish you. To him be the power forever and ever. Amen. (1 Peter 5:8-11)

According to this Sacred Scripture passage, our enemy is the devil. Because of him, there is hardship. He can be overcome, if we live in firm faith. If we are to live in such a faith, we have to shun away from sin. For that, we have to receive the Sacrament of Confession, when we fall into sin. If not, we lose sanctifying grace. i.e. we will lose the right to enter the kingdom of God.

13.1 Picture - Receiving the Sacrament of Reconciliation

54

There are two kinds of punishments for our sins:

1. Eternal Punishment

2. Temporal Punishment

The Following passage enumerates the two kinds of punishment, and how a sinner can get rid of those punishments.

To understand this doctrine and practice of the Church, it is necessary to understand that sin has a double consequence. Grave sin deprives us of communion with God and therefore makes us incapable of eternal life, the privation of which is called the "eternal punishment" of sin. On the other hand every sin, even venial, entails an unhealthy attachment to creatures, which must be purified either here on earth or after death in the state called Purgatory. This purification frees one from what is called the "temporal punishment" of sin. These two punishments must not be conceived of as a kind of vengeance inflicted by God from without, but as following from the very nature of sin. A conversion which proceeds from a fervent charity can attain the complete purification of the sinner in such a way that no punishment would remain. (CCC 1472)

The Lord is not slow about his promise, as some think of slowness, but is patient with you, not wanting any to perish, but all to come to repentance. (1 Peter 3:9)

One should not be slow to ask pardon from God for the wrongs that he has done. One should be contrite for his sins and get rid of the sinfulness. Only then everyone can enter the Kingdom of Heaven. The above Biblical quotation shows that God has given time to repent for one’s sins.

55

To get rid of Eternal Punishment

The one who has committed a mortal sin has only one means to get rid of Eternal Punishment, i.e. the Confession (Sacrament of Reconciliation). Thus says the teaching of the Catholic Church on this:

The forgiveness of sin and restoration of communion with God entail the remission of the eternal punishment of sin, but temporal punishment of sin remains. While patiently bearing sufferings and trials of all kinds and, when the day comes, serenely facing death, the Christian must strive to accept this temporal punishment of sin as a grace. He should strive by works of mercy and charity, as well as by prayer and the various practices of penance, to put off completely the "old man" and to put on the "new man." (CCC 1473)

The Sacrament of Reconciliation makes it possible for one to enter the Kingdom of God. Thereby one can get freed from the eternal punishment.

Even though one gets rid of eternal punishment, he has to pay compensation for his sins. Paying compensation for the sins that one has committed is called “Temporal punishment.”

If one comments a mortal sin, he has to make a confession immediately. Thus says the “Catholic Family Catechism” about it.

If we commit a mortal sin, we should immediately makes an act of contrition and confess our sins to a priest at the earliest. (Catholic Family Catechism 248)

56

Even though we have not committed a mortal sin, it is good to make confession now and then. Thereby we receive absolution for our sins and get the strength to keep away from sins.

To get absolution for our sins through the Sacrament of Reconciliation

1. First, pray asking divine grace to make a good confession. Make an

examination of conscience, by pondering on each of the Ten Commandments and the precept of the Church.

2. Have sorrow for going against the divine love and reject the wrongs, done.

3. Make a firm desire not to sin again.

4. Confess all the sins without hiding any.

5. Fulfil the punishments, given by the priest.

Rite of Confession

³³ Sign of the Cross

³³ “Bless me father, for I have sinned.”

³³ Tell the last date of confession

³³ Tell each of the sins in detail with the number of occasions from the last date

of confession

³³ “This is all I can remember. I am sorry for these and all my sins.”

³³ Listen to the priest attentively. Welcome the advice and punishments, given

by him.

³³ When the priest says the prayer of absolution, say the “Act of Contrition”

³³ The sign of the cross

³³ “God bless you!”

57

Do not delay in fulfilling the punishments, given by the priest

Your duty towards others

Having understood the necessity of confession and received it whenever necessary, we have to lead others also to receive the Sacrament. Make others realize the damage, done by the sin and as a result going away from divine love. Let you teach others the rite of confessing, if they have forgotten. Let you guide others to go to confession. You may guide others to live a life of grace, free from Eternal and Temporal punishments.

1. Explain separately the Eternal and Temporal Punishments.

For LifeLet us go to confession occasionally for venial sins though we have not committed mortal sins. Let us direct others also to do the same.

Activity

58

Sacrament of the Anointing of the sick14

Since Lord Jesus is the divine healer, He can not only heal the sick but also forgive the sins. He gave that power to the apostles: “Cure the sick,” (Matthew 10:8). His apostles practiced that power later on. The following passage testifies to that:

Are any among you sick? They should call for the elders of the church and have them pray over them, anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord. The prayer of faith will save the sick, and the Lord will raise them up; and anyone who has committed sins will be forgiven. (James 5:14-15)

According to the teachings of the apostles, the anointing of the sick is done by the priests. With regard to the Anointing of the sick, “Catholic Family Catechism” says:

14.1 Picture - The Anointing of the Sick

59

The Sacrament which confers spiritual strength and physical strength to a person who is seriously sick is the Sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick.

This Sacrament of the Anointing of the sick was earlier more commonly called the Sacrament of the Extreme Unction because it was conferred on persons who were critically sick and often happened to be the last anointing in person’s life.

However, it is wrong to believe that this Sacrament is conferred only when a person is in danger of death. This Sacrament has also healing power and causes the recovery of the sick. (Catholic Family Catechism 267)

Those who are eligible to receive the Sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick

³³ Those who are in danger of death due to their old age or sicknesses

³³ Those who are to undergo critical surgery

³³ Those who are not in danger of death but can die in a short time

Each time a Christian falls seriously ill, he may receive the Anointing of the Sick, and also when, after he has received it, the illness worsens.

(CCC1529)

60

The Special Graces and Effects of the Sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick (CCC 1532)

¡¡ The uniting of the sick person to the passion of Christ, for his own good and

that of the whole Church; ¡¡ The strengthening, peace, and courage to endure in a Christian manner the

sufferings of illness or old age; ¡¡ The forgiveness of sins, if the sick person was not able to obtain it through the

Sacrament of Penance; ¡¡ The restoration of health, if it is conducive to the salvation of his soul; ¡¡ The preparation for passing over to eternal life.

This Sacrament has to be conferred to the person in need so that he may have these graces. For that the priest has to be called. Before the priest comes, the place and the person have to be prepared.

Things that are to be prepared, before the priest arrives

³³ Having laid a cloth on a table, cross and a lamp have to be kept on it

³³ A serviette / towel, a basin of water, cake of soap, etc. have to be ready

³³ Clean the sick person and the place as much as possible

Having made the sick person understand that the anointing of the Sick is not for the dying but for the sick, he is to prepare physically and spiritually to receive the Sacrament. This should not alarm the sick person and therefore, his fear has to be eliminated.

Do not wait till a patient is critically ill to confer the Sacrament

Let us look after the sick. Do not think that it is a burden. We know that the Anointing of the Sick grants many graces. As children of God, let us prepare the sick in advance to receive the Sacrament without waiting till the last moment. Let us recognize those in need of this Sacrament and make it known to the parish priest.

61

1. Name three graces of the Sacrament of the Anointing of the

Sick.2. Write one of your duties towards the sick.3. Write a prayer that can be said when a sick person is visited.

For LifeLet us pray for the sick at the daily prayers.

Activity

62

The Rite of the Anointing

of the Sick15

Before anointing the sick person, the priest may hear the confession of the sick person.

INTRODUCTORY RITES

Having worn the surplice and the stole, the priest greets the sick person and those who are present by saying: “The peace of the Lord be with you always.” The priest sprinkles the sick person and those present with holy water, saying: “Let this water call to mind our baptism into Christ, who by his death and resurrection has redeemed us.” Then he addresses those present in these or similar words:

Priest : My dear friends, we are gathered here in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ who is present among us. As the gospels relate, the sick came to him for healing; moreover, he loves us so much that he died for our sake. Through the apostle James, he has commanded us: “Are there any who are sick among you? Let them send for the priests of the Church, and let the priests pray over them, anointing them with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith will save the sick persons, and the Lord will raise them up; and if they have committed any sins, their sins will

15.1 Picture - The Anointing of the Sick

63

be forgiven them.” Let us therefore commend our sick brother/sister (Name of the person) to the grace and power of Christ, that he may save him/her and raise him/her up.

PENITENTIAL RITE

Priest : My brothers and sisters, to prepare ourselves for this holy anointing, let us call to mind our sins. (After a brief period of silence)

Lord Jesus, you healed the sick: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Lord Jesus, you forgave sinners: Christ, have mercy. Response : Christ, have mercy.

Priest : Lord Jesus, you give us yourself to heal us and bring us strength: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : May almighty God have mercy on us, forgive us our sins, and bring us to everlasting life.

Response : Amen.

LITURGY OF THE WORD

Read Matthew 8:5-10, 13

PRAYERS OF THE FAITHFUL

Priest : My brothers and sisters, in our prayer of faith let us appeal to God for our brother/sister (Name of the person).

Priest : Come and strengthen him/her through this holy anointing: Lord, have mercy.

64

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Free him/her from all harm: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Free him/her from sin and all temptation: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Relieve the sufferings of all the sick Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Assist all those dedicated to the care of the sick: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

Priest : Give life and health to our brother/sister (Name of the person), on whom we lay our hands in your name: Lord, have mercy.

Response : Lord, have mercy.

LAYING ON OF HANDS

In silence, the priest lays his hands on the head of the sick person. The priest says a prayer of thanksgiving over blessed oil

THANKSGIVING OVER BLESSED OIL

Priest : Praise to you, God, the almighty Father. You sent your Son to live among us and bring us salvation.

Response : Blessed be God who heals us in Christ.

Priest : Praise to you, God the only-begotten Son. You humbled yourself to share in our humanity and you heal our infirmities,

Response : Blessed be God who heals us in Christ.

Priest : Praise to you God, the Holy Spirit, the Consoler. Your unfailing power gives us strength in our bodily weakness.

65

Response : Blessed be God who heals us in Christ.

Priest : God of mercy, ease the sufferings and comfort the weakness of your servant, (Name of the person), whom the Church anoints with this holy oil. We ask this through Christ our Lord.

Response : Amen.

ANOINTING

The priest anoints the sick person with blessed oil.First, he anoints the forehead, saying

Priest : Through this holy anointing may the Lord in his love and mercyhelp you with the grace of the Holy Spirit.

Response : Amen.

Then he anoints the hands, saying:

Priest : May the Lord who frees you from sin save you and raise you up.

Response : Amen.

PRAYER AFTER ANOINTING

Priest : Let us pray. Lord Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, by the grace of your Holy Spirit cure the weakness of your servant (Name of the person) Heal his/her sickness and forgive his/her sins; expel all afflictions of mind and body; mercifully restore him/her to full health, and enable him/her to resume his/her former duties, for you are Lord for ever and ever.

Response : Amen.

Viaticum

After the Lord’s Prayer, the priest shows the Eucharistic Bread to those present, saying: “This is the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world. Come to me all you that labour and are burdened and I will refresh you.” The people give

66

the respective response. The sick person and all who are to receive communion say do so.

The priest says the concluding prayer.

Priest : Let us pray. All-powerful and ever-living God May the Body and Blood of Christ your Son be for our brother/sister (Name of the person) a lasting remedy for body and soul. We ask this through Christ our Lord.

Response : Amen.

BLESSING

Priest : May almighty God bless you, the Father, and the Son, + and the Holy Spirit.

Response : Amen.

When the priest comes to anoint a sick person, we must assist him, pray for the sick person and pray loud enough so that the sick person may hear.

About the viaticum, the Catechism of the Catholic Church teaches:

In addition to the Anointing of the Sick, the Church offers those who are about to leave this life the Eucharist as viaticum. Communion in the body and blood of Christ, received at this moment of "passing over" to the Father, has a particular significance and importance. It is the seed of eternal life and the power of resurrection, according to the words of the Lord: "He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day." The sacrament of Christ once dead and now risen, the Eucharist is here the sacrament of passing over from death to life, from this world to the Father. (CCC 1524)

67

Thus, just as the sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and the Eucharist form a unity called "the sacraments of Christian initiation, " so too it can be said that Penance, the Anointing of the Sick and the Eucharist as viaticum constitute at the end of Christian life "the sacraments that prepare for our heavenly homeland" or the sacraments that complete the earthly pilgrimage. (CCC 1525)

1. Name the sub rites of the Rite of the Anointing of the Sick.

For LifeHaving found out those in need of the Sacrament of the Anointing of the Sick, inform to the Parish Priest.

Activity

68

Protect One’s life16

Human Life is

sacred

Man is created to the image of God

Protect life from danger

Protect Life

Life is a precious gift of God

Respect Human

life

Our life is

invaluable

Be careful of your health

Our life belongs

to God

Think of the above headlines.

Life is invaluable. It is a gift of God. Each person is born of parents as a result of divine mercy. Our life belongs to God.

One, who is alive today, may die tomorrow. No one can prolong his life by his own effort.

69

Human life is sacred because from its beginning it involves the creative action of God and it remains forever in a special relationship with the Creator, who is its sole end. God alone is the Lord of life from its beginning until its end: no one can under any circumstance claim for himself the right directly to destroy an innocent human being. (CCC 2258)

“Our lives are Temples of the Holy Spirit.” Therefore, we must take care to live a life in keeping with its sacredness. We must live a life, pleasing to God and we must be careful about our health. It is because our life is a gift and it belongs to God.

Since it belongs to God, we must pay a just attention to it.

The use of drugs inflicts very grave damage on human health and life. Their use, except on strictly therapeutic grounds, is a grave offense. Clandestine production of and trafficking in drugs are scandalous practices. They constitute direct co-operation in evil, since they encourage people to practices gravely contrary to the moral law. (CCC 2291)

Because of liquor and smoke, one gets sick. Diseases, such as cancer is a result of them.

Life is a gift of GodLet us use our talents in the service of people.

70

Suicide

Everyone is responsible for his life before God who has given it to him. It is God who remains the sovereign Master of life. We are obliged to accept life gratefully and preserve it for his honor and the salvation of our souls. We are stewards, not owners, of the life God has entrusted to us. It is not ours to dispose of. (CCC 2280)

If one tries to commit suicide, it is an effort to grab a right of God. It is a mortal sin.

The one who gave me life is God. My life depends on him. So let us pray to Him so that He may protect my life.

Since life is a gift of God, it is our duty to take medicine when we get ill and to be careful of our health. We must be careful when we eat and drink, because sicknesses are a result of wrong habits of eating. If one eats food with too much of sugar, salt or fat, he may get sicknesses, such as blood pressure, diabetics, heart attacks and he may die soon. We have to protect the precious life, given by God. We need exercise for our body. If we maintain our health, we can protect the life, given by God.

71

1. Write an article to a Catholic Newspaper on the topic,

“Life is a precious gift of God.”2. Write five things that help you to protect your life.

For LifeRespect and protect the precious life, given by God.

Activity

72

Protecting the Lives of

Others17

Chorus:Love it was that made usAnd it was love that saved usLove was God’s plan, when He made manWhose divine nature is Love.Born of God’s love we must love HimThat’s why He made us to love Him.But only when we love all menCan we partake of God’s love.But only when we love all menCan we partake of God’s love.

Love is a wonderful thingJoy in our hearts it will bring,Where there’s true love there is God,And where there’s God there is Love.

Christ said: Love must be a signBy which men will know you are mine,A new commandment I give,Each other love as I did.

Sing the above hymn meditatively and reflect the meaning of it.

Respecting Human Life

Abel was a keeper of sheep, and Cain a tiller of the ground. In the course of time Cain brought to the LORD an offering of the fruit of the ground, and Abel for his part brought of the firstlings of his flock, their fat portions. And the LORD had regard for Abel and his offering, but for Cain and his offering he had no

73

regard. So Abel was a keeper of sheep, and Cain a tiller of the ground. In the course of time Cain brought to the LORD an offering of the fruit of the ground, and Abel for his part brought of the firstlings of his flock, their fat portions. And the LORD had regard for Abel and his offering, but for Cain and his offering he had no regard. So Cain was very angry, and his countenance fell. The LORD said to Cain, “Why are you angry, and why has your countenance fallen? If you do well, will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well, sin is lurking at the door; its desire is for you, but you must master it.” Cain said to his brother Abel, “Let us go out to the field.” And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and killed him. (Genesis 4:2-8)

The offering of Abel was pleasing to God. As a result of that, it was accepted by God. If our offerings are to be pleasing to God, we should offer the best. For an example, we should offer the best time to God by praying, i.e. as soon as we get up daily.

Cain was jealous of Abel, because Cain’s offering was not accepted. Though jealousy is a small thing, it led him to the point of killing of his own brother, Abel.

Jealousy is a Capital sin. It is considered as a Capital sin because it may lead a person to commit a mortal sin. Therefore, we should get rid of even Capital sins. It is obvious that jealousy led to the point of revenge in the case of Cain and Abel story.

If one takes revenge, it deprives him of respecting others. Therefore, we should shun away from revenge. Even Lord Jesus taught that we have to love all without taking revenge.

If we live according to the hymn, found at the beginning of the lesson, we can respect the lives of others.

74

Abortion

Picture 17.1: A child in mother’s womb

Picture 17.2 - A child at its birth

Look at the pictures attentively. Having kept a child in her womb for ten months, a mother gives birth to a child. Therefore, you have to be grateful to your mother and father. They have been looking after you since your conception to this moment.

Life begins not at birth but at the conception. The following Holy Bible passages show that the life belong to God from the moment of conception:

75

Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, and before you were born I consecrated you; (Jeremiah 1:5)

My frame was not hidden from you, when I was being made in secret, (Psalms 139:15)

If the life in mother’s womb belongs to God, we have no right to kill even a child in a mother’s womb. It is morally wrong. The sin, committed by Cain, is also done by the one who aborts. In abortion, the child in mother’s womb is more innocent and helpless than Abel. It is a murder of a person who cannot protect himself. About this, thus says the Catechism of the Catholic Church:

Abortion is gravely contrary to the moral law: (CCC 2271)

Do Not Murder

The Holy Church teaches that we should not only abort but also should not kill anybody.

Scripture specifies the prohibition contained in the fifth commandment: "Do not slay the innocent and the righteous. "The deliberate murder of an innocent person is gravely contrary to the dignity of the human being, to the golden rule, and to the holiness of the Creator. The law forbidding it is universally valid: it obliges each and everyone, always and everywhere. (CCC 2261)

76

From the words, said to Cain, it is clear that not only the innocent, but also the offenders cannot be killed:

Then the LORD said to him, “Not so! Whoever kills Cain will suffer a sevenfold vengeance.” And the LORD put a mark on Cain, so that no one who came upon him would kill him. (Genesis 4:15)

Lord Jesus recalled the Fifth Commandment at the Sermon on the Mount:

You have heard that it was said to those of ancient times, ‘‘You shall not murder’’; and ‘‘whoever murders shall be liable to judgment.’’ But I say to you that if you are angry with a brother or sister, you will be liable to judgment; and if you insult a brother or sister, you will be liable to the council; and if you say, ‘You fool,’ you will be liable to the fire of hell. (Matthew 5:21-22)

Lord Jesus instructs that we should live amicably with our neighbour. Thus, it is clear that we ought to protect the lives of others.

Anger, vengeance, revenge, etc. are against fraternal love. Lord Jesus taught that we should not take revenge: “if anyone strikes you on the right cheek, turn the other also.”

As children of God, our behaviour should be great. As children of divine Father, we must love our neighbours. Fraternal love is one of the characteristic of Christian life. Thereby, the lives of others are protected. Since all are created in the image and likeness of God, all of us are children of God.

77

1. Write three things that you can do to protect the lives of

others.2. Explain how abortion is a sin

For Life

Since every life is a creation of God, let us commit ourselves to protect the lives of others.

Activity

78

Do Not Commit Adultery18

The sacredness of the man, created in the image and likeness of God, rests on the relationship between man and woman. Lord Jesus showed that it was sacred. Therefore, He did his first miracle at the Wedding Feast in Cana. A man shall leave his father and his mother, and be joined to his wife; and they shall become one flesh.

Matrimony is a sacrament. It is the teaching of the Church that the husband and wife join together for a higher cause at marriage. It is not a playful life. One should not marry in order to fulfill his lust. One who has sexual relationships outside marriage, sacrileges the sacredness of the marriage.

The best fruit of love is marriage. In the modern world, the sacredness of marriage is tarnished, but the Catholics should try their best to protect its beauty. Therefore, there should not be any illegal affairs before or after marriage.

We should be holy in our word, deed and the way we look at others. We should avoid pornography, i.e. reading pornographic books, looking at pornographic pictures and films.

Picture 18.1 - The Sinful Woman

79

I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lust has already committed adultery with her in his heart. (Matthew 5:28)

Sins against the 6th Commandment

³³ Reading pornographic books

³³ Watching pornographic pictures and films

³³ Having more than one wife / husband

³³ Rape

³³ Homosexuality

³³ Child abuse

³³ Pre marital relationships

Requirements to Live a Holy Life

³³ Self control

³³ Unselfish friendship

³³ Prayer

³³ Respect the body

³³ Respect Sexuality

³³ Receive the sacraments and receive the graces

According to the First Letter to the Corinthians, body is not for adultery, but for the Lord:

The body is meant not for fornication but for the Lord. (1 Corinthians 6:13)

80

1. Write an article to a magazine on “Let us live a holy life and

lead a pure life.”2. Having written three sins against the 6th commandment,

write three advices that you give to your friends on how to avoid those sins.

For Life

Let us treat all in fraternal love. Respect and appreciate all.

Activity

81

You shall not Covet Your Neighbour’s Wife19

Man is created with body and soul. There is a constant struggle between body and soul. This struggle is a result of sin. We need the strength and power of the Holy Spirit to overcome temptations.

If an idea or thought of sin comes to mind, it is not a sin. If such a thing lingers in our mind without our consent, it is also not a sin. It becomes a sin, when we entertain it with our consent.

Purity requires modesty, an integral part of temperance. Modesty protects the intimate center of the person. It means refusing to unveil what should remain hidden. It is ordered to chastity to whose sensitivity it bears witness. It guides how one looks at others and behaves toward them in conformity with the dignity of persons and their solidarity. (CCC 2521)

Man with a pure heart does a great service to the society. One, who listens to God, has pure thoughts. We can get converted from evil thoughts by contrition. By making our thoughts pure, we can live in accordance with our human dignity.

You shall not covet your neighbour’s wife. (Exodus 20:1)

Carnal concupiscence is an intense form of human desire. To have illegal affairs with the married is against this commandment.

The Ninth Commandment warns against lust or carnal concupiscence. It advises us to refrain from all kinds of deeds and thoughts which destroy the purity of the family life.

King David sinned against this commandment by having an illegal affair with Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah. Since it displeased God, King David was punished. Herod Antipas committed the same sin by marrying his brother’s wife. St. John the Baptist showed his fault.

82

To live a pure life

Let us respect others

Let us protect the rights of others

Be sensitive to others with good intention

Let us live a good moral life

Let us do only what is pleasing to God

Let us make our bodies Temples of the Holy Spirit

But if you go to bed with another man’s wife, you will destroy yourself by your own stupidity. (Proverb 6:32)

Purification of the heart demands prayer. One ought to control one’s mind. By keeping the commandments and respecting others, let us live a good moral life.

1. Write three things that you can do to live a pure life.2. Write three suggestions to make the society pure.

For Life

Create in me a clean heart, O God.

Activity

83

Exemplary Lives20

St. Maria Goretti

She was born on the 16th of October 1890. She lived with her parents in a small town, called, Corinaldo in Italy. Her parents were Luigi Goretti and Assunta Carlini. She was the third in a family of seven.

Though her family was poor, they lived happily and closer to God and Mother Mary. When she was six years old, they shifted to Paliano. After the death of the father, with mother she undertook the responsibilities of the family. With brothers and sisters, she

lived a life pleasing to God. One day when nobody was at home, Alessandro came and tried to persuade her to commit sin against the 6th commandment. She did not give in. Therefore, he stabbed her. Before her death, she told her mother: “Mother, I gave a promise on the day of my First Communion, i.e. I will not get destroyed my divine life even if I have to die. I have kept that promise.” Just like Lord Jesus forgave those who crucified her, St. Maria Goretti forgave Alessandro, the one who stabbed her.

When she died, she was 12 years old. She is a saint today. Her feast is celebrated on the 6th of July.

Just like St. Maria Goretti, we have to protect our character. We must pray that God may help us to protect our divine life and we may live faithfully to Him. Let us ask the mediation of St. Maria Goretti to live like her.

Picture 20.1 - St. Maria Goretti

84

St. Agnes

She had a deep faith in God and lived a chaste life from her childhood. On the day of her 12th birthday, she went to mass with her parents and received Communion. After the mass, she met the Bishop and told him that she would live as a virgin throughout her life and dedicate her life to Lord Jesus. On the same evening the son of the governor sent her a gift with the intention of marrying her. She rejected the gift saying that she has married to the Son of the Heavenly King, Lord Jesus. On hearing this, he got angry and ordered to arrest her. Soldiers put her in jail. She was forced to offer flowers and incense to statues of gods and goddesses. She continued to pray to God in firm faith without obeying the wicked. The son of the governor came and promised to deliver her from all persecutions, if she consented to marry him. She told him that she belonged to Lord Jesus Christ, her saviour. On hearing this, he got angry and ordered to kill her.

She was beheaded. She was faithful to Lord Jesus till her last moment. She was buried in the family tomb outside Rome. Today that tomb bears her name. The Church celebrates her feast on the 21st of January.

Picture 20.2 - St. Agnes

85

St. Dominic Savio

He was born on the 02nd of April 1842 in the village of Riva, northern Italy. His parents were Charles and Bridget Savio. He spent his early life at home. He was

blessed with God’s graces.

Dominic Savio requested to give him First Communion at the age of seven. This was not the practice in the Church of Italy at that time. Normally, children received their first holy communion at the age of twelve. Dominic's Parish Priest was so impressed with his intelligence concerning the faith, his love for the Lord and his piety that he made an exception. He said to Dominic Savio: “I will give you a beautiful gift on Easter Sunday. On that day I will give First Communion to you.” It was a happy news to Dominic Savio. He informed this to his parents. From that time onwards, he received Communion regularly with devotion.

He gave the example in words and deeds to those in school to live good Christian lives. He fell ill desperately. Dominic was sent home to recover from his ill health. At home he spent a saintly life of prayer.

He died on the 09th of March 1857. When he was nearing his death he saw a wonderful vision and said: “Oh, what wonderful things I see”

Saint Dominic is the patron saint of choirboys, the falsely accused, and juvenile delinquents. His green scapular has helped many pregnant women to give birth to children without pain. The feast of St. Dominic Savio is celebrated on the 10th of March.

Picture 20.3 - St. Dominic Savio

86

1. Write an article to a newspaper on “Exemplary Lives.”2. Write three things that you can do to live a saintly life.

For Life

Let us dedicate our lives for the betterment of others.

Activity

87

What is Asked in Prayer

will be given21

(Anthony is a good carpenter)

Anthony : Father, I did not get any job for three months. I do not know how to meet the day-to-day expenses of the family.

Parish Priest : You are a devout Catholic. You pray to God daily. You have a

deep faith in God. Don’t lose heart. Pray to God fervently. He will answer your prayer. I also will help you.

(He went home)

Ana Maria : What did Father say?

Anthony : He asked to pray continuously without losing faith.

Ana Maria : Look, one of the pastors of a fundamentalist sect told me that he would give me one hundred thousand rupees, if we come to their sect abandoning Catholic faith. But I said to him that we serve one only one God and therefore we will not be apostates even if we have to die of hunger.

Anthony : Having gone with those who feed themselves by selling their religion, we cannot go to hell. We have to trust in God. Let us pray continuously. We will not miss the bus.

(One Day one of the Tuition Teachers came to meet Anthony, the carpenter)

Sumanasiri : I want to make 500 desks and 500 chairs. I know that you are the best carpenter in Moratuwa. Can you do the work for me?

Anthony : Why not? I’ll definitely do it for you as soon as possible.

Sumanasiri : Very good, I will give you five hundred thousand rupees for the job. Here, take this two hundred thousand rupees as an advance. I will give the rest as the work progresses. What do you say?

88

Anthony : Sir, I’ll do it for you.

(Sumanasiri gave the two hundred thousand rupees to Anthony then and there. That afternoon, he went to meet the Parish Priest and gave him some money)

Anthony : Take this money for the Church. Today I got a work of five hundred thousand rupees. Since I prayed to God fervently and continuously, I got a job to fulfil the needs of my children. Thanks be to God.

Prayer of Prophet Elijah

Prophet Elijah made an altar on the Mount Carmel. Prophet Elijah and the prophets of Baal arrange two burnt offerings separately. It was decided that the true God will send a fire and burn the offering. Although the prophets of Baal prayed, their offering was not burnt by a fire. Having poured water on the offering, Prophet Elijah prayed in this manner:

“O LORD, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known this day that you are God in Israel, that I am your servant, and that I have done all these things at your bidding. Answer me, O LORD, answer me, so that this people may know that you, O LORD, are God, and that you have turned their hearts back.” Then the fire of the LORD fell and consumed the burnt offering, the wood, the stones, and the dust, and even licked up the water that was in the trench. (1 Kings 18:36-38)

(By this act, it was proved who the true God was)

At the end of the offering on the Mount Carmel, the drought was over and it started to rain. God protects those who believe in Him. In addition to that, He helps them in their needs. Therefore, we also should pray with faith in times of difficulties.

89

Rain as a Result of Prayers of St. Joseph Vaz

Picture 21.1 - St. Joseph Vaz prayed in Kandy

St. Joseph was a prisoner during the reign of King, Vimaladharmasooriya II. At that time, the people were suffering due to a long period of drought. Not only their cultivations were destroyed, but also they did not have water even to drink. Buddhist and other religious rituals were done praying for rain. They were in vain. Finally, the king asked St. Joseph Vaz’s assistance. Having built an altar in front of the king’s palace and kept a cross on it, St. Joseph Vaz prayed in deep faith. Soon the sky got dark and it began to rain, but not a single drop of water fell on St. Joseph Vaz and the altar.

If we pray fervently, miracles do happen. Therefore, we should pray daily in deep faith. By the experience we get through prayer, we can lead others also to pray in the same manner.

90

1. Write two guidelines that you get through the prayer of

Prophet Elijah on the Mount Carmel.2. Describe in short how you realized one of your needs

through prayer.3. Write an advice that you give to your friend who is weak

in faith.

For Life

Ask your needs in faith.

Activity

91

Ask Good Things in Prayer22

We who become Catholics by Baptism inherit two lives, namely Worldly Life and Eternal Life. Although Worldly life is short, Eternal Life has no end. We have to hoard merits (spiritual rewards) for Eternal Life. In daily prayers, we must get used to pray for the betterment of the others. Even the Holy Bible teaches on the need of praying for the good things.

Prayer of King Solomon

At Gibeon God appeared to King Solomon in a dream by night; and said, “Ask what I should give you.” King Solomon said, “Give your servant therefore an understanding mind to govern your people, able to discern between good and evil; for who can govern this your great people?” (1 Kings 3:9). This prayer of King Solomon pleased God. Therefore, God promised King Solomon to give a wise and discerning mind, riches and honor.

This shows that we have to pray for an understanding mind to discern between good and evil. In the same way, this stresses that we will have to pay if we go away from God. This teaches that if one keeps away from sin, God will fulfill our necessities.

Picture 22.1 - King Solomon

92

Ask, and it will be given you; search, and you will find; knock, and the door will be opened for you. For everyone who asks receives, and everyone who searches finds, and for everyone who knocks, the door will be opened. Is there anyone among you who, if your child asks for bread, will give a stone? Or if the child asks for a fish, will give a snake? If you then, who are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask him! (Matthew 5:7-11)

We must make it a point to search what is spiritually good, but not what is materially good. Your life becomes meaningful if you live for others. We must have a great personality, if we are to live for others and to make others happy. The good brings us closer to God. If one looks for only material things, he may get ruined. Possessing material things may take us away from God. Therefore, one who decides what is good is God.

1. Write two parables that show that God gives good things to those

who ask. 2. Write two examples that you can imitate from the prayer of King

Solomon.3. Write in 50 words how you explain the need of prayer to your

friend who says, “God does not give even good things even if we ask them in prayer.”

For LifePray for only what is good.

Activity

93

The Canticles23

My soul doth magnify the Lord,And my spirit has rejoiced in God my SaviourFor He who is mighty has done great things for meAnd holy is his name

Chorus:My soul doth magnify the LordMy soul doth magnify the LordAnd my spirit has rejoiced in God my SaviourFor He who is mighty has done great things

23.1 Picture - Mother Mary

And holy is His name.From age to age he shows his love,And his mercy is forever to his servants,For he stretches out his arm, casts down the mighty.And raises up the meek.

He fills the hungry with good food.When the rich demand their share,Their hands are empty.He has kept all his promises to Israel:His mercy is made known.

To God the Father we sing praise,And to Jesus, whom he sent to be our Saviour!To the Spirit of God be all glory,For holy is his name!

1. What is the background of this hymn?2. What does this hymn speak of?

94

There are three Canticles in the New Testament, sung by various people in praise of the graces they received from God.

1. The Canticle of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Magnificat) (Luke 1:46-55)

Virgin Mary went to Zechariah’s house to visit St. Elizabeth and greeted her. Then the child in St. Elizabeth’s womb leaped for joy. Having filled with the Holy Spirit, St. Elizabeth exclaimed with a loud cry. Then Virgin Mary sang this Canticle:

My soul magnifies the Lord,and my spirit rejoices in God my Saviour,for he has looked with favour on the lowliness of his servant.Surely, from now on all generations will call me blessed;for the Mighty One has done great things for me,and holy is his name.His mercy is for those who fear himfrom generation to generation.He has shown strength with his arm;he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts.He has brought down the powerful from their thrones,and lifted up the lowly;he has filled the hungry with good things,and sent the rich away empty.He has helped his servant Israel,in remembrance of his mercy,according to the promise he made to our ancestors,to Abraham and to his descendants forever. (Luke 1:46-55)

2. The Canticle of Zachary (Luke 1:68-79)

Zachary was dumb till the birth of St. John the Baptist and once he got the ability to talk; he praised God in this manner:

95

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,for he has looked favourably on his people and redeemed them.He has raised up a mighty saviour for usin the house of his servant David,as he spoke through the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,that we would be saved from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us.Thus he has shown the mercy promised to our ancestors,and has remembered his holy covenant,the oath that he swore to our ancestor Abraham,to grant us that we, being rescued from the hands of our enemies,might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousnessbefore him all our days.And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High;for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,to give knowledge of salvation to his peopleby the forgiveness of their sins.By the tender mercy of our God,the dawn from on high will break upon us,to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death,to guide our feet into the way of peace. (Luke 1:68-79)

3. The Canticle of Simeon (Luke 2:29-32)

When the time came for the purification according to the Law of Moses, the parents of Lord Jesus brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to God. Then Simeon took him in his arms and praised God, saying:

96

1. Name three Canticles, found in the New Testament.2. What is stressed by the Canticle of Virgin Mary?3. Explain to what extent you agree on the statement, “We must

praise God when we are happy.”

For Life

Praise God When you are happy.

Activity

Master, now you are dismissing your servant in peace,according to your word;for my eyes have seen your salvation,which you have prepared in the presence of all peoples,a light for revelation to the Gentilesand for glory to your people Israel. (Luke 2:29-32)

In the same manner, we, Catholics should get trained to praise God in our day-to-day prayer.

97

Types of Prayer24

24.1 Picture - Praying to God

Prayer is a dialogue that carries the needs of the people to God and that helps man to understand the will of God. We can build a deep relationship with God through prayer. There are three types of prayer in the Christian tradition.

1. VOCAL PRAYER

Vocal prayer is prayer using words either loud or silently. E.g. Prayer of St. Francis of Assisi and Our Father

Whether or not our prayer is heard depends not on the number of words, but on the fervour of our souls. Vocal prayer is an essential element of the Christian life. To his disciples, drawn by their Master's silent prayer, Jesus teaches a vocal prayer, the Our Father. Vocal prayer is the form of prayer most readily accessible to groups. (CCC 2700-2704)

98

2. MEDITATION

Meditation is above all a quest. In that quest, the mind seeks to understand two things:

1. the purpose of Christian life 2. How the Christian life has to be lived

In meditation, we do these two things in order to adhere and respond to what God is expecting from us.

To meditate on what we read helps us to make it our own by confronting it with ourselves. To the extent that we are humble and faithful, we discover in meditation the movements that stir the heart and we are able to discern them. Meditation is only a guide; the important thing is to advance, with the Holy Spirit, along the one way of prayer: Christ Jesus. Christian prayer tries above all to meditate on the mysteries of Christ, as in the Prayer of the Church or the rosary. (CCC 2705-2708)

3. CONTEMPLATIVE PRAYER

Contemplative prayer is possible for those who have reached the higher levels of prayer. Vocal prayer is the first stem of contemplative prayer.

Thus says St. Teresa about contemplative prayer: "Contemplative prayer in my opinion is nothing else than a close sharing between friends; it means taking time frequently to be alone with him who we know loves us."

Entering into contemplative prayer is like entering into the Eucharistic liturgy. We recollect our whole being under the prompting of the Holy Spirit, abide in the dwelling place of the Lord which we are, awaken our faith in order to enter into the presence of Him who awaits us.

Contemplation is a gaze of faith, fixed on Jesus. Contemplative prayer is hearing the Word of God. Contemplative prayer is a silent love. Contemplative prayer is a union with the prayer of Christ insofar as it makes us participate in his mystery. (CCC 2709-2719)

99

These types of prayer are useful for us to grow in our Christian spiritual life. We should pay attention to that. We must take part in all the prayer services, organized in the parish.

Prayer of Saint Francis of Assisi

Lord, make me an instrument of your peace.Where there is hatred, let me bring love.Where there is offense, let me bring pardon.Where there is discord, let me bring union.Where there is error, let me bring truth.Where there is doubt, let me bring faith.Where there is despair, let me bring hope.Where there is darkness, let me bring your light.Where there is sadness, let me bring joy.O Master, let me not seek as muchto be consoled as to console,to be understood as to understand,to be loved as to love,for it is in giving, that one receives,it is in self-forgetting that one finds,it is in pardoning, that one is pardoned,it is in dying, that one is raised to eternal life.

1. Name two types of prayer in the Christian tradition.2. What is insisted by vocal prayer?3. Write two functions of meditation.4. Explain how the various types of prayer help to grow in spiritual

life.

For Life

Participate in all the prayer services, conducted in your parish.

24.2 Picture - Saint Francis of Assisi

Activity

100

AsIPA25

AsIPA stands for “Asian Integral Pastoral Approach.”

History and Background

In 1990 more than 400 Bishops of Asia gathered at Bandung in Indonesia for the 5th Plenary Assembly of Federation of Asian Bishops Conferences (FABC). As a result of deep meditation of the Bishops of this Assembly, AsIPA was proposed.

It aims to implement the vision of the new way of being Church, to train lay people to take leadership and carry out their mission in the Church and in the world. It also aims to make laity to read the Word of God in the Small Christian Communities and to act accordingly.

It also was revealed that this can be implemented in the parishes by establishing Small Christian Communities. Therefore, it is very essential to form Small Christian Communities, based on the Word of God.

A

s

i

an

I

n

t

e

r

g

r

a

l

Pa

st

o

r

a

l

A

p

p

r

o

a

c

h

101

Preparing the Place for AsIPA Meeting

²² Select a place suitable for the AsIPA meeting²² Place a table in that place and cover the table with a white cloth²² Place the Holy Bible on the table as it is kept on the Ambo²² Place a lamp of oil in front of the Holy Bible and light it²² All sit around the Holy Bible as a small group

Seven Steps

Step One: WE INVITE THE LORD

The facilitator asks a few people in the group to invite Lord Jesus in a personal and friendly manner in short prayers.

E.g.

²² Lord Jesus, as you came to the house of Martha and Maria, come to our midst.²² Lord Jesus, as you came to the house of Zacchaeus, come to our midst.²² Lord Jesus, you who said, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life” come to our midst.

Step Two: WE READ THE TEXT

²² Let us turn to the Gospel of St. … Chapter … (Say this twice)²² Turn Chapter … Verse … to Verse ….²² Invite two or three people to read the text slowly and prayerfully

Step Three: WE PICK OUT WORDS AND MEDITATE ON THEM

²² Pick out words or short phrases, read them aloud prayerfully, and keep silence

in between.

Step Four: WE LET GOD SPEAK TO US IN SILENCE

²² We keep silence for three minutes and allow God to speak to us.

102

Step Five: WE SHARE WHAT WE HAVE HEARD IN OUR HEARTS

²² Share the experience that you have in relation to the words or short phrases that

you picked up.

Step Six: WE DISCUSS ANY TASK WHICH OUR GROUP IS CALLED TO DO

²² Give chance to make some proposals which may help those in need.²² Among those proposals, select the best one to be implemented in the near future.

Step Seven: WE PRAY TOGETHER SPONTANEOUSLY

²² Invite some to thank the Lord for being with the group. (Even the prayers of the

faithful can be said)

1. What does AsIPA mean?2. When and where was AsIPA started? 3. Why was AsIPA started?

For Life

Organize AsIPA meeting in your school.

Activity

²² All the Pictures were obtained from the internet.