==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

Catholicism

Grade 7

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2015

Second Print - 2016

Third Print - 2018

Fourth Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978 955 25 0564 5

Published by : The Educational Publications Department

Printed by : Sisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd. No. 110, Pagoda Road, Pitakotte.

iii

iv

Foreword

With the continuous advancement of the world, the education sector too is transformed. Therefore, if we require the creation of a student community who could confront the future challenges successfully, our learning teaching process must constantly utilize effective approaches. It is our responsibility to disseminate the knowledge of the new world while assisting to create global citizens with good values. Our department is actively engaged in producing learning tools with the great aim of contributing to enlighten the minds of the children of the country.

A textbook is a repository of knowledge. At times, it takes us to a world of entertainment while developing our critical thinking faculties. It promotes our hidden potentials. In the coming years, the memories related to these textbooks will bring you happiness. While making the maximum use of this valuable learning tool, you must essentially access other useful knowledge spaces too. I wish that you would gain the ability to enlighten the future as citizens with knowledge and values by using this textbook.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the panels of writers, editors and reviewers as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department for the contribution made on this endeavor.

W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications DepartmentIsurupaya,Battaramulla.26.05.2020

v

Monitoring and Supervision

W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayake - Commissioner General of Educational Publications Department

Direction

W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination

R.D. Wijewickrama - Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

S.G.D.N.L. Samarakoon - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Advisory Board

Most Rev. Dr. Oswald Gomis

Rt. Rev. Dr. Maxwell Silva

Panel of Editors

Very Rev. Fr. Piyal Janaka Fernando - National Chatechetical Director, No: 19 Balcombe place, Colombo 8

Rev. M.G.L. Fernando - Assistant Director of education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya

Panel of Writers

Sr Timali Lowe - Teacher, W.P/ Pili/ St/ Joseph Balika M.V., Nugegoda

Dushmanthi Daya Kumari - I.S.A. , Zonal Education Office,De Silva Minuwangoda

vi

Anne Nishanthi Rathnasinghe - Teacher, W.P/ Pili/ St/ Joseph Balika M.V., Nugegoda

N. Fransisca Rajayogini - Teacher, All Saints B.M.V., Borella Transalation

Rev. Sr. Mechtilde Marie - 'Lankarama', No: 19 Balcombe place Fernando Colombo 8

Anne Fernando - Co-ordinating Officer, (Catholicism) Lyceum College, Panadura

Computer Type setting, Page Layout and Cover Page

L.A. Sanduni Nilanka Pathmasiri - Computer Unit Educational Publications Department

vii

CONTENTS Page

The Holy Bible1. The Prophets of Israel 12. The Oratary Prophets 43. Major Prophets 84. Minor Prophets 12

Faith in the Holy Trinity5. The call of Abraham 166. Covenant with Abraham 217. Isaac 268. Jacob the Patriarch 319. The call of Apostles 36

Strength For the life of Faith10. Sacrament of Baptism 4211. Sacrament of Holy Orders 4612. Religious Life 5013. Vocation of the Laity 5514. The Sacrament of Matrimony 60

Living the life of Faith15. Obey & Respect Your Parents 6516. Do Not Give False Witness 6917. Do Not Steal 7318. Do Not Covet Your Neighbour's Goods 76

Life of Prayer19. Devotion of the Rosary 7920. Novenas & Feast Days 8521. Vespers & Benediction 8922. The Way of the Cross 9323. The Holy Hour 9824. Adoration of the Holy Eucharist & Procession 10125. Pilgrimages 104

viii

1

The Prophets of Israel

By holding a mirror to the sunlight it can be reflected on to a specific place. Mirror reflects the rays of the sun which falls on it. In the Old Testament there was a group of people who did the same role which was done by the mirror. They are “prophets of Israel”. When they receive the message of God, they proclaimed it to the people of Israel. The picture given below depicts it.

The word for prophet in Hebrew is “Nabi” and the Greek word is “prophetes”. Those words give the meaning "of the one who proclaims on behalf of God".

Oratary Literary

majorminor

(Non Literary) or (Ancient)

Prophets of Israel

1

picture 1.1 - The role of a prophet

2

There are two categories of prophets in the Old Testament.

1. Oratary Prophets : In the Old Testament, they do not have books

or writings under their names, but their words and deeds are found in the historical books like I and II Samuel and I and II Kings. Such oratary prophets' names are Nathan, Elijah and Elisha.

2. Literary Prophets : There are writings or books under their names

in the Old Testament. These prophets can be di-vided into two groups. ¸. Major prophets ¸¸. Minor prophets

i. There are 3 Major Prophets

³³ Isaiah³³ Jeramiah³³ Ezekiel

ii. There are 12 Minor Prophets

³³ Hosea ³³ Nahum³³ Habakkuk³³ Zephaniah³³ Haggai³³ Zechariah³³ Malachi

³³ Joel³³ Amos³³ Obadiah³³ Jonah³³ Mica

The prophet who speaks on behalf of God must first listen to the voice of God. He should open himeslf to the divine voice to understand the message which he has to proclaim to the people.

In todays society, the Word of God (Holy Scripture) is the most effective media which brings the divine voice to us. As same as that, different people are helping us to identify the divine voice; they are

3

Priests, Religious, Parents, and teachers. Even the signs of the time are also helpful to us to find the divine voice.

A Prophet who speaks on behalf of God is bound with responsibility to speak what God wants, but not what he wants. Therefore prophet receives a vocation to hand over the God's plan to people.

Through Baptism, all of us had been anointed to be the prophets in the Church. It is very difficult to witness to this prophetic call, but we can be strengthened and be active with the power of God. According to that the responsibilities mentioned below were given us to follow.

³³ Act truthfully³³ Bring back all those who are doing wrong into the correct path³³ Challenge against those who are trying to hide the truth³³ Guide others to do the correct thing³³ Proclaim the message of the Bible to others

We should dedicate ourselves to be the prophets of the era, and try to make the God's plan, a reality in the society. By guiding, correcting, challanging and witnessing, we can be true prophets in the society.

1. Define the word “Prophet”.2. Write the classification of the Old Testament Prophets.3. Mention three tasks that you can do as a prophets.

For LifeBe a prophet of the era through your word, deed and examples.

Activity

4

The Oratary Prophets

2

There were some people who witnessed to the truth and spoke on behalf of God in the Old Testament. These people were named as Prophets. Out of all the Prophets, Oratary Prophets performed their task very effectively.

1. Prophet Nathan2. Prophet Elijah3. Prophet Elisha

Prophet Nathan

picture 2.1 - Prophet Nathan

When king David had an immoral behaviour with Bethsheba who was the wife of Uriah, Prophet Nathan narated a parable and explained about the sin that king David did. Because of Prophet Nathan, king David was able to understand his sinfulness and repented.

By showing king David's sinfulness Prophet Nathan was able to bring

him to the correct path tactfully. As students we should also act like Prophet Nathan, if we see or find someone is doing a wrong thing. We should explain and bring that person into the correct path, without hurting him or her.

5

picture 2.2 - Prophet Elijah

Prophet Elijah

During a season of drought, with a command of God, Elijah went and stayed by the brook of Cherith. Ravens brought him bread and meat. Thereafter he went to a house of a widow, who lived in a town of Zarephath. In her house, there was only a handful of flour in a bowl and a drop of olive oil in a jar. Because of her hospitality and obedience to Elijah, the bowl of flour and the jar of oil did not run out untill the drought ended.

When at times we become helpless, we will be protected through the blessings and graces of God. The care we get is called “Divine Providence.” That is the same Divine Providence Elijah had experienced during the drought.

The Sacrifice on Mount Carmel

On Mount Carmel Elijah and the Prophets of Baal, prepared two sacrifices to offer their Gods. They believed that the true God, will send fire from above burn the sacrifice and prove that God accepts the sacrifice. Prophets of Baal prayed loud and did their other rituals, their sacrifice was not burnt by Baal. Elijah who poured water on and around the Sacrifice prayed to the Lord. His sacrifice was accepted and burnt into ashes. Through this incident, it proved who the ture God is.

picture 2.3 - The sacrifice on Mount Carmel

6

As soon as they finished their sacrifices on Mount Carmel, it ended the drought and heavy rain began to fall. God protects those who believes in Him at the same time He helps them when they are in need. Therefore, we too should keep our faith in God and pray for Divine Providence.

Prophet Elisha

Prophet Elijah called Elisha while he was ploughing his field behind twelve pairs of oxen, by putting his cloak over his shoulders.

Curing Naaman from a dreaded skin disease

picture 2.4 - Prophet Elisha

picture 2.5 - Naaman in the River Jordan

7

Prophet Elisha cured the dreaded skin disease of Naaman, who was a commander of the Siriyan army. Elisha cured Naaman, because he wanted to show him, that there is no other God on earth than the God Almighty. At the same time, Elisha wanted to end up the pride of Naaman. Through this curing it gives us a lesson, not to expect any payment for the help we do to others.

We can experience healing through prayers. Prayer gives us a great strength to our life. We cannot find or gain any success in our life without prayer. At that same time, we should worship one and only God, the Almighty. It is our responsibility to observe the first commandment of the Ten Commandment.

Activity

1. Read the passage 2nd Samuel 12:1-7 and write the

parable in your words.2. Write an incident which you have experienced the

Divine Providence.

For LifeAlways act in a way that suites the occasion.

8

You can remember, in the first lesson we have learnt that the Literary Prophets can be categorized into two divisions. They are Major and Minor Prophets. In this lesson you can learn about the three Major Prophets.They are 1. Isaiah 2. Jeramiah 3. Ezekiel

Major Prophets

The meaning of the name Isaiah is “God Saves”. Isaiah lived in the eighth century B.C. and his father was Amoz.

Prophet Isaiah

picture 3.1 - Prophet Isaiah

3

9

Prophet Jeramiah

picture 3.2 - Prophet Jeramiah

The meaning of the name Jeramiah is “God has lifted.” Jeramiah lived in seventh and sixth century B.C. and his father was a priest named Hilkiah.

Prophet Ezekiel

picture 3.3 - Prophet Ezekiel

The meaming of the name Ezekiel is “God has Encouraged” He lived in sixth Century B.C. and Ezekiel's father's name was Buzi. Prophet Ezekiel proclaimed the message of God to Israelites who were in the Babylonian Exile.

10

The call of Prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 6:1-8)

The Lord is seated on a high and lofty throne, with the trail of his garment filling the Temple. Seraphim were stationed above; each of them had six wings: with two they veiled their faces, with two they veiled their feet, and with two they hovered aloft.

“Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of hosts” they cried one to the other. “All the earth is filled with his glory.” At the sound of that cry, the frame of the door shook and the house was filled with smoke. Then I said “woe is me, I am doomed! For I am a man of unclean lips, living among a people of unclean lips, yet my eyes have seen the king, the Lord of hosts!”

Then one of the seraphim flew to me, holding and ember which he had taken with tongs from the altar.

He touched my mouth with it. “see” he said “now this has touched your lips, your wickedness is removed, your sin purged”

According to the call of Isaiah, the temple was the Holy palace of God, where He is dwelling. Therefore venerability of the temple should be protected and also to take action to maintain the protection, respect and honour of the place while you are serving in the temple.

11

Activity

Because of that;

²² When you are entering the church, kneel down, bend your head and

worship to the Blessed Sacrament²² Should not walk or run here and there²² Should not talk or shout inside the church²² Should not eat any food inside the church²² Should come in clean and tidy clothes.

While they were proclaiming the God's message, prophets had to take the leadership. Today that task or the responsibility was given to you who were baptized. Therefore we have to develop the leadership qualities to lead;

²² Facing the challanges²² Accepting the responsibilities²² Working as a community²² Dedicating for the work

1. Draw a schema and include the names of the three major

prophets, the meanings of their names, the time they lived and their fathers name.2. Mention five tasks you can do to protect the honour and

respect of your church.3. Write five characteristics of the Leadership.4. Mention five ways which you can serve in you parish.

For LifeAccept responsibility in every work.

12

In this picture you can see some minor Prophets. Their responsibility was to hand over the message of God to the people. Through that message they wanted to show the people, injustice of the society corrupted administration, the destruction because of the sinfulness of people, the necessity of a real repentance, establishing a good and righteous life. The people of the past who turned away from God were advisded to come back to God.

Amos

Jonah

Haggai

Hosea

Habakkuk

Malachi

Minor Prophets

picture 4.1 - Minor Prophets

4

13

Prophet Amos

He was a Prophet who lived in Israel in 8th century B.C. He was a shepherd as well as a farmer who grew olives as his occupation. At the time of Prophet Amos, the society of Israel was corrupted with injustice, dishonesty oppression of the poor people and earned money in an unlawful way by opressing the people at a time like. It was Amos who got his

prophetic call, proclaimed boldly to the people that the God of Justice hates those who are doing against his will.

Because of that Amos was named as “The Prophet of social justice”. Therefore we too must live a righteous life and stand against injustice of the society as Prophet Amos did.

Prophet Hosea

Hosea is another Prophet who lived in the 8th century B.C. He had to fulfill his mission in Israel. The marriage life of Hosea was a good message he had to proclaim in his prophetic mission. He had married a woman called Gomer who went after other men leaving Hosea behind. Even though she went away, Hosea invited her to repent and finally she repented for all her sins. As Gomer

picture 4.2 - Prophet Amos

picture 4.3 - Prophet Hosea

14

turnd back to Hosea and went away from him, Israelites too forgot their God who loved them immensely, and went after the mythical gods and goddeses and worshiped them. As he did to his wife Hosea called all the people of Israel to repent for their sins. He invited them to come out of the darkness of sin. He also guided them to go after the Lord Almiglily to offer their love and respect once again. As Hosea guided the people of Israel towards God the Almighty, we too have to worship one God love and serve him as good Christians.

Prophet Jonah

Another Prophet who lived in 8th

century B.C. was Jonah. He received a call to go to the wicked people of Nineveh and he invited them to repent for their sinful life. Jonah rejected God's call and wanted to flee away from God to the city of Tarshish. The ship which Jonah sailed caught into a furious storm. The officers of the ship cast lots to find who was the cause for the

storm. It fell on Jonah's name. Jonah revealed them that he is fleeing away from God's wish and because of him the sea grew more turbulent. He also requested them to put him into the sea. Even though they did not want to do any crime of murder with the strong appeal of Jonah, they threw Jonah into the sea. The sea calmed down at once. Jonah was swallowed by a large fish and spewed him up on to the beach after three days. Lying on the beach Jonah understood he had come to Nineveh. Jonah stayed in the city and proclaimed God's message to repent for their sins. The people of Nineveh believed the God's message, they prayed, fasted, and showed that they are repenting for their sins. Finally with the guidence of Jonah, the people of Nineveh received mercy of God. Therefore we also should take steps to bring back those who are doing wrong things into correct path as Prophet Jonah did.

picture 4.4 - Prophet Jonah

15

1. Complete the statements given below by writing the

appropriat name.²² ....................................... used his marriage life for his

prophetic task.²² ........................................ led the people to repent for their

sins and receive mercy of God. ²² ........................................ was named as Prophet of social

justice.2. Write what kind of prophetic task you can do at the incidents

given below.

Incident Prophetic task

²² When a helpless child is

oppressed by others in the class room²² When your brother or

sister living a life away from God ²² When you meet a friend

who is leading a bad life

.......................................................................................

.......................................................................................

.......................................................................................

For LifeI will fulfill my prophetic call by understand the signs of the time.

Activity

16

The call of Abraham

After the sin of Adam and eve, God promised to send a saviour to liberate the whole mankind from their sin. To fulfill that promise, the first person who was chosen by God was Abraham. The God's calling, which was received by Abraham was the starting point for his special vocation. The Holy Bible reports the special call of Abraham as follows.

picture 5.1 - Abraham

“The Lord said to Abraham: “Go forth from the land of your kinsfolk and from your father's house to a land that I will show you.” I will make of you a great nation and I will bless you. I will make your name great, so that you will be a blessing ......................... Abraham went as the Lord directed him and Lot went with him. Abraham was seventy - five years old when he left Haran. Abraham took his wife sarai, his brother's son Lot, all the possessions that they had accumlated and the persons they had acquired in Haran and they set out for the Land of Canaan...... The Lord appeared to Abraham and said, “To your descendants I will give this land”. (Genesis 12:1,2,4,5,7)

5

17

The brith place of Abraham was Ur. But lived in Haran with his father and his relations. When he was in Haran he got a speacial call from God. According to that call, he had to go to Canaan. That land was also known as “Promised Land” You can identify Ur, Haran, Canaan, in the map given below.

The call of Abraham has two elements 1. Sacrifice 2. Challenge

Things which Abraham Sacrificed

His Nation His People

His Father's House

Black Sea

PontusAsia Minor

Arminia

Mount Ararath

MediaNinivaAsiria

Percia

Shushan

Alam

Bay of

Persia

Tiagris RiverBabiloniaBabilonia

KaldiaArabia

Eupratis River

Mesopothemia

Syria

Haran

Canaan

Ur

Aram

Mount Hermon

Jordan River

Ammon

Adom

Mount Hor

Midian

Red sea

Mount Sinai

Paran

Goshen

Mediteranian sea

Cyprus

Misarea

Nile River

Kush

Dead Sea Movab

18

Abraham had to leave his father's tribe (House), his own people, and at the same time his own nation. Even though he needed his relations to share his sorrows, joys, pain, and happiness he had to leave everything and started his joumey by keeping his full confidence in God. He also believed fully about the vocation that he received from God. Because of that faith Abraham was known as “Father of Faith”. Taking his exemplary life of faith, we too can learn to keep our trust always on God and act accordingly in our day to day life.

Great descendantsTo live a life always on a journey

Going to an unknown land

The challenges that Abraham had to face

Abraham had to accept the promise of God for great descendants, when he was advanced in age and his wife was said to be barren. Abraham had to journey into an unknown far away land, which is Canaan, about 800 miles (1300 kilo meters) away from his own land Haran. They are the cahallenges that Abraham faced.

God's Promise to Abraham

When listening to the voice of God and live according to it, certai things have to be sacrificed in our lives, it is also we have to face challenges. But everything will not come to an end from sacrifices and challenges.

19

God's abundant blessings wiil be showered upon on those who obey the will of God. The graces which Abraham received in future was expressed through the God's promise the promise itself is two fold.

1. Great descendant through Abraham2. Abraham's descendants possessing the Land for ever

When God called Abraham, he was at the age of 75 and his wife was 65. But God promised them to give a child to make a big generation. According to the promise that generation was Israelites: the land that they possessed was “Promised Land”.

The Examples we can take from the call of Abraham

²² As students, God calls you for different tasks, therefore you must be

prepared to obey his call.²² According to the call, give maximum service to the Lord.²² Keep your trust fully in God, accept His Word, and live according

to it.²² In our life journey, we should be ready to accept different things that

we have to sacrifice.²² At the decisive moments in our life, we should change our life by

accepting the will of God.²² We should pray to God abundantly to get strength to face challenges

successfully.

20

1. Write two elements of Abraham's vocation. 2. Write in three points, how you are guiding one of your

friends to keep trust in God at the time he/she lost confidence in God.3. Write how you are acting to be victorious at the below

mentioned challenges

¸ When your best friend is not in good terms with you and turned back to you.¸¸ When you were defeated at the sports event.¸¸¸. When your parents did not give their consent to go on

a trip.¸v. When your mother fell down with a serious sickness.v. When your life filled with sorrows and troubles.4. Write the two promises God had given to Abraham.5. Write three points that you can take from the examplary life

of Abraham.

For Life

²² Let us accept the vocations we get in day to

day life.²² In all our needs, let us turn towards God with

trust.²² Let us face the challenges in faith.²² Let us experience Divine Providence through

faith.

Activity

21

Covenant with Abraham

Covenant is an agreement between two persons or between two parties. In the modern society, there are different agreements: marriage agreement, trade agreements etc are some of them. After every covenant or an agreement, it was verified by the two parties by signing those agreements. The covenants which happend between God and man had a speciality than the covenants between a man and a man. God took the initiative in those covenants. In every covenant, God explained about the covanant and also fulfilled the promises.

God made a covenant with Abraham

The covenant with Abraham had two promises

Large generation

Possesing a land for ever

A large Generation

He brought him out side and said “Lookup at the sky, and count the stars, if you can. Just so,” He added “shall your descendants be” (Genesis 15:5)

I will render you exceedingly fertile; I will make nations of you; kings shall stem from you. (Genesis 17:6)

6

22

The above Scripture passages show us that Abraham is going to be the father of a big generation. God fulfilled his promise and gave him a son. Although he was advance in age, because of Abraham Sarah gave birth to a son and his name was Isaac.

A land inherited forever

“To your descendants, I will give this land of Cannanites.” (Genesis 15:21)

“I will give to you and to your descendants after you, the land which you are now staying, the whole land of Canaan as a permandent possession”. (Genesis 17:8)

The above scripture passages show us, God is going to give the land of Canaan to Abraham and his descendants. Abraham's whole future life was depended on God's grace and mercy. Holy Scripture proves us the promise that God gave to Abraham had succeeded as it was. In their old age, Abraham and Sarah had a child. His name was Isaac. The great nation had developed through Isaac. The descendants of Abraham became the heirs of the land of Canaan.

How they did the Covenant

He said to him “I am the Lord who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land as a possession.” O Lord God" he asked “How am I to know that I shall possess it?” He answered him. “Bring me a three-year old heifer, a three year old she goat, a ram three - year - old a turtle dove and a young pigeon”. He brought him all these, split them in two and placed each half opposite the other; but the birds

23

he did not cut up....... when the sun had set and it was dark, there appeared a smoking (fire pot) and a flaming torch, which passed between those pieces (Genesis 15:7-10,17)

The above Scripture passage shows us how God did a covenant with Abraham. The smoking brazier and the flaming torch which passed in between those pieces symbolized not Abraham but God Himself. Those smoking brazeir and the flaming torch symbolized God. Therefore only God had gone in between those pieces. God enlightened Abraham's life by going through his life's sorrows, pains obstacles and troubles.

Symbol of the Covenat (Circumcission)

“This is my covenant with you and your descendants after you, that you must keep: every male among you shall be circumcised. Circumcised flesh of your foreskin, shall be the mark of the covenant between you and me. Throughout the ages, every male among you when he is eight days old, shall be circumcised.”

(Genesis 17:10-12)

Circumcission was the external symbol of the covenant, which God made with Abraham. It was the sure symbol of the Israelites dedication to God. It was a symbol of a special vocation. As the descendants of Abraham were circumcised, we too were Baptized. Through that we became the people of God in the new covenant who are dedicated to God.

24

Changing the Name of Abraham and the meanings of Names

“No longer shall you be called Abram; your name shall be Abraham, for I am making you father of a host of Nations.” (Genesis 17:5)

The previous name of Abraham was Abram. The meaning of Abram is “The great father” God changed the name “Abram” into “Abraham” which gives the meaning of “Father of Nations”

The name of a person indicates the personality of the person. By changing the name also signifies the life style and the status of that person. At Baptism all of us were given a Christian name. Find out the Christian name you were given. Get the life story of that saint and read. Did you try to imitate that saint; after meditating upon that life? Some times you may not have a Christian name as such, even though, you were dedicated to God through Baptism. Think of that, and try to live as a dedicated child of God.

Through Baptism we entered into a life of covenant. Because of that, we have to live according to our Baptismal promises. We have to be faithful to God and reject satan and evil actions. As a student you have to understand that you were also given a vocation through your Baptism. There are many ways and means to succeed in your vocation.

³³ Be an active member of the Church³³ Introduce Jesus Christ by bearing witness to him through your life³³ Be a witness to your faith in the presence of others³³ Live according to the ten commandments³³ Fulfill the promises given to others³³ Be a witness to the Living Christ, through your missionary activities³³ Always listen to God who speaks to you through your life experiences

25

Activity

1' What are the two main points of the covenant with Abraham?2. What is the meaning of the name “Abraham”?3. Write three tasks that you can do in your parish as a Baptized

person, who were invited to live in the covenantal life.4. Write three points each, how you are fulfilling your promises

towards your parents and teachers.

For Life

³³ Fulfill your promises.³³ Live according to the Baptismal

promises.

26

Isaac

God was kind to Sarah as he has said, and fulfilled his promise to her. Sarah became pregnant and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time that God had stated. Abraham gave the name Isaac to this son of his whom sarah bore him. When his son Isaac was eight days old, Abraham circumcised him, as God had commanded. Abraham was hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him. Sarah then said, “God has given me cause to laugh, and all who hear of it, will laugh with me.” (Genesis 21:1-6)

When Isaac was born, Abraham was 100 years in age and sarah was 90 years in age. This shows, nothing is impossible with God. Because of that we have to keep our trust fully in God and have to pray in faith. The meaning of the name Isaac is “Smiling”.

picture 7.1 - The Birth of IsaacThe Birth of Isaac

7

27

picture 7.2 - Sacrificing IsaacAbraham Sacrificing Isaac (Genesis 22:1-19)

God :- “Abraham! Take your son Isaac, your only one, whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah. There you shall offer him up as a holocaust on a mountain that I will point out to you.”

Abraham :- Son, Isaac let us take fire wood and go to the land of

Moriah to offer a holocaust.

Isaac :- Yes my father, I hurry and prepare my self.

Abraham :- Alright my son, let us start our journey. (Abraham gave

fire wood to Isaac, and took the fire and the knife in his hand and both started their journey)

Isaac :- Father we have fire and firewood; but we do not have a sheep for the holocaust?

Abraham :- Son, God himself will provide us with a sheep for the

holocaust. When Abraham came to the place of which God had told him, Abraham built an altar. There he arranged the wood over it. Next he tied up his son Isaac and put him on top of the wood on the altar. Then he reached out and took the knife to slaughter his son.

Angel :- Abraham, Abraham ! do not lay your hand on the boy. I

28

know now, how you are devoted to your God. Since you did not withhold from me your own beloved son. (As Abraham looked about, he saw a ram, caught by its horns in the thicket, so he went and took the ram and offered it up as a holocaust in place of his son)

The people of the land of Canaan had a tradition to offer their first child to the mythical gods. To follow that tradition Abraham also prepared to offer his son as a sacrifice. God gave him a ram instead of Isaac. By this, God wanted to show the ritual which was among the Cananites should not be done by Israelites any more. At that point, according to God's promise, Abraham had to obey God and was ready to sacrifice his own son, even though the dream of a big generation was laid on Isaac's life, because he loved and trusted God.

It proved, Isaac also obeyed his father and accepted to do the will of God. We too should also obey our parents as Isaac and become good children. God is also expecting us to trust him and become good children. Today, God expects us to live a good dedicated life as he expected from Abraham.

Renewing the Covenant through Isaac

But when Isaac's servants dug in the valley and found spring water in their well, the shepherds of Gerar quarreled with Isaac's servants, saying, “The water belongs to us!” Then they dig another well; but over this, they did not quarrel. It was called “Rehoboth”, because he said “The Lord has now given us ample room, and we shall flourish in the land”. From there Isaac went up to Beersheba. The same night the Lord appeared to him and said, “I am the God of your father Abraham you have no need to fear, since I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake

29

of servant Abraham.” So he built an altar theae and invoked the name of the Lord.

(Genesis 26:19-25)

When Isaac's servants, dug in the valley and found spring water, in their well, the shepherds of Gerar quarreled with Isaac's servants saying “The water belongs to us.” But the response that Isaac showed was very important. Isaac did not fight against with them. What Isaac did was, advised his shepherds to dig their well on some other land. According to that, Isaac gives us an example, not to fight with anybody.

God encouraged Isaac and renewed the covenant of Abraham with Isaac, saying, “you have no need to fear. since I am with you. I will bless you and multiply your descendants for the sake of my servant.”

The examples we can take from Isaac's life

Should be with God with unshakable faith

Obeyed the advices of parents

Bear all the pains and sufferings patiently

Pray to God

Not to fight with others

To be a good obedient child

30

Activity

Isaac reminds us to live peacefully with everyone. This is the only solution for all our problems, in our families, schools and in our society where we live.

1. What is the meaning of the name “Isaac”?2. Write three ways how you can obey your parents at

home?3. Write three characteristics, you should have to live

peacefully when you are faced with problems.4. Write two virtues that Isaac had in his life.5. Write three examples you can take from the life of

Isaac.

For Life

²² Be an obedient child of your parents.²² When you work, cooperate with others.²² Train yourself to be patient when troubles

come.

31

Jacob the Patriarch

Abraham had begotten Isaac. Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel and the sister of Laban. Isaac entreated the Lord on behalf of his wife since she was sterile. Lord heard his entreaty and Rebekah became pregnant. But the children in her womb jostled each other so much that she exclaimed “If this is so, what good will it do to me!” She went to consult the Lord and he answered her. Two nations are in your womb; two people are quarelling while ill within you. But one shall surpass the other and the older shall serve the younger. When the time of her delivery came there were twins in her womb. The first to emerge was reddish and his whole body was like a hairy mantle; so they named him Esau. His

picture 8.1 - Birth of Jacob

The Birth of Jacob

8

32

brother came out next, gripping Esau's heel; so they named him Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when they were born to Rebekah.

(Genesis 25:19-26)

picture 8.2 - Vision at Bethel

Vision at Bethel (Renewing the Covenant)

Jacob departed from Beer - sheba and proceeded towards Haran. When he came upon a certain shrine, as the sun had already set, he stopped there for the night. Taking one of the stones at the shrine he put it under his head and laid down to sleep at that spot. Then he had a dream: a stairway rested on the ground. With its top reaching to the heavens; and God's messengers were going up and down on it. And there was the Lord. Standing beside him and saying. “I, The Lord, am the God of your forefather Abraham and the God of Isaac; the land which you are lying I will give to you and your descendants. These shall be as plentiful as the dust of the earth, and through them you shall spread out East and West,

33

The covenant that God had done with Abraham was renewed with Jacob. “The land which you are lying, I will give to you and your descendants. These shall be as plentiful as the dust of the earth and through them you shall spread out East and West, North and South” Jacob received his vocation at that place. When Jacob awoke from his sleep, he named that place as “Bethel” which means “The House of God”

Vision at Penuel (Genesis 32:24-32)

North and South. In you and your descendants all the nations of the earth shall find Blessings. Know that I am with you; I will protect you wherever you go and bring you back to this land. I will never leave you until I have done what I promised you.” When Jacob awoke from his sleep he exclaimed "Truly the Lord is in this spot, although I did not know it" Early the next morning Jacob took the stone that he had put under his head set it up as a memorial stone and poured oil on top of it. He called that site Bethel.

(Genesis 28:10-16, 18-19)

picture 8.3 - Vision at penuel

After living in Haran, Jacob set out on his journey back home to the promised land. While Jacob continued on his journey, one man wrestled with him until the break of dawn. When the man saw that he could not prevail over him, he struck Jacob's hip at it's socket; so the hip socket of Jacob was wrenched, as they wrestled. The man then said, “Let me go, for it is day break.” But Jacob said “I will not let you go, until you bless me". "What is

34

your name?” the man asked. He answered “Jacob”, then the man said, “you no longer be spoken of as Jacob, but as "Israel”, because you have contended with divine and human beings and have prevailed. Jacob then asked him “Tell me your name please.” He answered, “why should you want to know my name?” with that he blessed Jacob and bade him fairwell. We can understand the story above that tells us about the spiritual struggle which Jacob had within himself to accept his vocation.

Jacob Reconciled with Esau

picture 8.4 - Jacob bowed Esaupicture 8.5 - Reconciled with Esau

Jacob looked up and saw Esau coming, accompanied by four hundred men. Jacob went on bowing to the ground seven times, until he reached his brother. (Genesis 33:1-3)

The above Scripture passage shows us how Jacob reconciled with his brother Esau. It verifies that Jacob bowed seven times in front of his brother. While he is coming towards him to greet in response to Jacob's action, Holy Bible reports, Esau ran to meet Jacob, embraced him and clinging flinging himself on his neck, kissed as he wept. They truly

35

Activity

reconciled themselves not only in words, but in the depth too. Those who forgive others will receive the forgiveness of God.

The examples we can get from the reconciliation of Jacob with Esau

³³ Accept the sinfulness and receive forgiveness after doing an offence³³ Forgive those who hurt you³³ Forgiveness which gives by word should be proved through the deed ³³ Live peacefully with your brother

1. Who are the parents of Jacob?2. Write the names of the twins, given birth by Rebekah?3. What did God say about the twins who were in Rebeka's

womb?4. Define the names, Esau and Jacob?5. Write in brief about the vision at Bethel?6. Define the word “Bethel”?7. Write, what was the reason, that Jacob received the name

"Israel"?8. Mention two examples you can take from the reconcilliation

of Jacob with Esau?

For Life

³³ Let us live peacefully with everybody.³³ Be friendly with those who are

aggressive to you.³³ Let us respond to the Divine voice.

36

The call of Apostles

The first disciples who followed Jesus (Matthew 4:18-22)

(One day Jesus was walking by the sea of Galilee)

Andrew : Peter, who is that person, coming towards us?

Peter : Ah! Is that Jesus? (Jesus comes towards them)

Jesus : “Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men” Peter and Andrew : “Lord , we will come with you” (As they walked little further with Jesus, and saw James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John. They too were in a boat mending their nets with their father)

Jesus : “Come after me” James andJohn : Lord, we are also coming with you. Father we are going with Jesus. Peter and Andrew are also with Jesus. They are our friends.

picture 9.1 - The calling of the fist four disciples

9

37

“Come and follow me” was the calling of Jesus to peter, Andrew James and John, and at once, they followed Jesus. It was explained by the above dialogue (Matthew 4:18-22). They are the first disciples of Jesus. They;

³³ Obeyed Jesus' word.³³ Left everything and followed Jesus.³³ Priority of their lives was given to Jesus.³³ Followed Jesus and proclaimed Good News to others.

“Come and follow me, I will make you the fishers of men”. We too have received a calling at our Baptism. Jesus calls all of us for different tasks. Therefore it is our responsibility to respond to those callings.

What we should do, to respond to our Christian calling

³³ We too should take the example of obedience of the first disciples

to our life.³³ We should respond to the call at any moment of our life.³³ Being obedient to the Jesus' words, we should fulfill our duties and

responsibilities which will be assigned to us.³³ We should meditate on God's word constantly.³³ By listening to the Divine word, we should explain the word of God

to others.

Call of Matthew

As Jesus passed on from there, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the custom's post. He said to him, “Follow me.” And he got up and followed him. (Matthew 9:9)

38

At the time of Jesus, the tax collectors were cornered from the Jewish society, because they collected excess taxes from the Jews in an unlawful way, which they should pay to the Roman empire. Because of that, the tax collectors were named as sinners. But Jesus invited such a person whose name was Matthew. Sitting at the custom's post said “Come follow me”. He got up, left everything and followed him. In the same way there were people of different occupations, situations and status were among the disciples of Jesus. When we receive God's call we are obliged to leave everything and follow Jesus at any situation and at any cost.

The Twelve Apostles

picture 9.2 - Twelve Apostles

The names of the twelve apostles are these: first Simon called peter, and his brother Andrew; James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John; Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, Simon the Canaanean and Judas Iscariot who betrayed him. (Matthew 10:2-4)

39

Jesus selected the twelve and called them Apostles, that they might be with him, and send them forth to preach and to have authority to drive out demons. The appointed twelve apostles are:

1. Saint peter2. Saint Andrew3. Saint James, Son of Zebedee4. Saint John5. Saint Philip6. Saint Bartholomew7. Saint Thomas8. Saint Matthew9. Saint James, son of Alphaeus10. Saint Jude Thaddeus11.Saint Simon Cananean12. Judas who betrayed Jesus

Judas who betrayed Jesus later repeuted for the act he did and hanged himself and died. Because of that one was less out of twelve. Therefore they prayed and selected Matthew to replace Judas, as an Apostle. So St. Matthew became the twelvth apostle of the early Christian community.

Commissioning the Missionary Responsibilities

Before his ascenssion, Jesus commissioned the Missionary Mandate to his Apostles by saying the below mentionad words.

“Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold I am with you always until the end of the age.”

(Matthew 19:20)

40

1. Name the first four disciples of Jesus.2. By following the call of the first disciples of Jesus,

write three tasks that you can do in your school.3. Read Acts 1/12-26 and write an essay about the incident

of choosing Matthew for the place of Judas.4. Write the three commands that Jesus had given to his

disciples at his fairwell discourse on the Ascenssion day.5. Mention three tasks that you can do to bring others to

God.

Before he bid farewell to his Apostles, Jesus had given responsibilities to his Apostles, to carry on His mission. “Make disciples of all nations”. According to that as baptized, we have to introduce Jesus to others. “Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit”. By this we see that the responsibility of conferring the sacrament of Baptism was directly given by Jesus Christ. “Teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you”. Because of this command, it is not enough to receive the sacrament of Baptism itself, but we have to observe the doctrine that Jesus taught, every day in our lives.

What we can do to introduce Jesus into the world

³³ Study the Holy Scripture thoroughly³³ Receive the sacraments³³ Constant participation in the Liturgy³³ Read, meditate, and live according to the Scripture³³ Be active in the missionary work³³ Join and serve in the associations and confraternities of the parish

Activity

41

6. The Names of the disciples of Jesus are hidden in the

cross word puzzle given below. Draw this puzzle in your exercise book and colour the appropriate cages which indicates the names of the Apostles.

SEB EDEJOHNBTSOMATLFUTUBBONNSTHJUDASUANSOMIOHLEVITROAFATMAVTSPETERATHAONHTHGHFALTISINAUILOMPPHMPMBDSLQLACHELOACDTIPOMSAWPJAMESPTM QREPQORLANDREWLURSHIRSIM OW MBSJAMESSONPALS

8. If you get a calling to serve God, write in five lines, how

you are going to act according to it?9. Write in 100 words, a speech you are giving at a religious

society on the topic “Importance of listening to the word of God?”

For Life

³³ Word of God is the source of wisdom which

leads towards.³³ Let us share the word of God with others.³³ Let us introduce Jesus to others

42

Nirmala : Hear ! the bell is ringing. Are we having religion now?

Cyril : Yes, Look our teacher is coming.

Teacher : God Bless you ! children

Children : God Bless you ! Teacher

Teacher : Children, let us sing a hymn to the Holy spirit (Teacher and the whole class sing the Hymn - Come Holy Ghost - creator blest) Who can say, how all of us can become Catholics?

Nirmala : Teacher I know the answer, I will tell you. We learnt that in

grade six. When we were infants we all received baptism. That is how we become Catholics.

Cyril : Teacher, I was baptized when I was a baby, the photograph which had taken on that day is still in our photo album.

Teacher : Very good children, all of us became Catholics because of

Baptism. Today I am going to tell you, how the sacrament of Baptism is conferred to a recipient.

Cyril : Teacher, When my baby sister was baptized, I saw father was pouring water on her head.

Teacher : Son, your memory is very good, today I will explain

everything clearly. When conferring baptism, water, paschal candle, white garment, Holy oil are used for the sacrament. Did you see those pictures in your 10th Lesson of grade 6 book.

Nirmala : Yes teacher, we saw that.

Sacrament of Baptism

10

43

Teacher : There is an Order to follow, to confer the sacrament of

Baptism.

Patrick : Teacher from where can we see that order? In which book can we find it?

Teacher : Haven't you seen the book which is used by the priest when

he is giving different blessings. That is the book which gives the order of the baptism. We call it Ritual.

Baptismal Rite

Picture 10.1 - Rite of baptism

44

²² In the name of the Father .....................²² Inquiring the (Christian) name of the child from parents ²² Informing the responsibilities of parents and God parents by the priest²² Making the sign of the cross on the child's forehead by the priest (parents

and God parents) : It symbolizes the salvation given by Jesus on the Cross ²² Liturgy of the word and the prayers of the faithful: to respond to the

Christian faith, so that those who listened to the word of God will be enlightened²² Invoking the Blessings of the saints²² Prayer of Exorcism : that symbolizes the defeating of satan and the sin²² Anointing with oil of catechumanate²² Priest keeps the hands on the head of the child and pray²² Making the Baptismal promises : parents and God parents, promise

on behalf of the infant, to believe in the triune God and reject the satan and his evil acts²² Pouring water on the head of the infant and Baptize the child : This

is the most essential and important part of the Baptismal Rite; that is “........... (name) I Baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy spirit” by saying these words water is poured three times on the head of that infant. Through this rite it indicates that the recipient will be Baptized with water and the Holy spirit.²² Anointing with the chrism oil (sacred chrism). The priest will be

anointing with the sacred chrism and make the infant a priest, prophet and a king²² Clothing with the white Garment : This symbolizes, that the child

who receives Baptism receives the virtues of the life of Jesus Christ.²² Lighting candle from the paschal candle : This symbolizes. that the

child will be enlightened by the light of the Risen Christ. Because of that, child should live as a light to the world.²² Blessing of the mother and father²² Final Blessing

45

Cannon Law about Baptism

There are some articles about the baptism in the code of Cannon Law

²² The child should be Baptized in the parish where he/she belongs.²² There should be a valid reason to receive Baptism away from the

parish Church.²² The child should be Baptized within the few weeks after he/she was

born.²² The parents should be spiritually and physically well prepared for

the child's Baptism. (Eg) inform the parish priest in time and get the instruction that is necessary to take up their Christian responsibilities as parents.²² Baptism should be given as soon as possible, for the children who

are at the point of death.²² The consent of either parties of the parents or the guardians should

be given on behalf of the child and the priest should have confidence on the child who would lead a life of Catholic faith.²² If anybody who receive baptism at the point of death, he/she should

promise to fulfill the expectations of the Catholic Doctrine, if he survived.

1. What is the most important and the essential part of the

Baptismal Rite?2. What is the meaning of lighting the candle from the paschal

candle?3. Make a small booklet with pictures which depicts the order of

the sacrament of Baptism.

For LifeObserve the Rite of Baptism very well and inquire the details of the Baptismal rite from your parish priest, for your knowledge.

Activity

46

Sacrament of Holy Orders

Focus your attention on the pictures given above. They depict the special events of the rite of Holy Orders. This sacrament is conferred by the Bishop by keeping his hands on the head of the deacon and praying over him. Bishop confers this sacrament to the recipient.

Ordination is a great vocation one can receive from God the Father. This is the sacrament, which was cammanded and handed over to his disciples by Jesus Christ himself, to carry on his mission in the Church,

picture 11.1 -Taking the priestly vows

picture 11.4 - Consecration prayer

picture 11.6 - Anointing hands with

sacred chrism

picture 11.5 - Clothing the priestly attire

picture 11.7 - Handing over the pattern with the host and the chalice with wine

picture 11.2 - Lying downwards and

pray

Picture 11.3 - praying over

the head of the recipient

11

47

till the end of the world. The sacrament of the Holy orders was instituted by Christ, at the Last supper on Holy Thursday. Because of that Holy Thursday is considered as the 'feast day of the priests' and on that day faithful are invited to pray for the priests. The sacrament of the Holy orders is one of the sacraments which keeps an indelible mark on the soul. Because of that, it can be recieved only once in the life time. The priest who receives the Holy orders, is a mediator between God and Man. There are three degrees in the ministerial priesthood. They are deacon, priest and Bishop. Their responsibilities were mentioned below.

Responsibilities of a Deacon

²² Proclamation of the Gospel and preaching in the Eucharistic celebrations²² Conferring the sacrament of Baptism

according to the Rite²² Giving the Eucharistic Blessing during

the Benediction²² blessing the married couple (rectifying

the marriage) ²² Presiding over funerals²² Assist the Bishop and priests in the

celebration of the divine mysteries

Responsibilities of a Priest

²² Celebrate the Divine worship (Holy

mass)²² Preach the Gospel²² Be a Shepherd to the faithful²² Confer the sacraments (except confirmation and Holy orders)²² Presiding at the Matrimonial Rite²² Blessing people and things

picture 11.8 - a deacon

picture 11.9 - a priest

48

Responsibilities of a Bishop

²² Pastoral care of the Diocese entrusted to

him²² To be a teacher to the people of God²² Sanctifying the people of God²² Protecting the faith of the people²² Celebrating the liturgy²² Conferring all the sacraments ²² Presiding at the marriage rite

picture 11.10 - a Bishop

Catholic priests can be divided into categories according to their life style

Priests

Diocesan PriestsThey serve under the Bishop in the particular Diocese

Religious PriestsThey serve under the superior general of the particular congregation according to their charism

Promises and vows of a priest

Priests should take promises or vows. They are

²² Diocesan Priests take two promises 1. Obedience - They promise to obey their Bishop 2. Celebacy - They promise to dedicate themselves for the kingdom without getting married²² Religious priests take three vows they are 1. Obedience - They vow to obey their superiors 2. Chastity - They vow to dedicate their chaste life for the benefit of the kingdom of God without getting married

49

3. Poverty - Cannot keep any possesions like Bank accounts, vehicles and Lands ect. All properties and assests will belong to the religious congregation.

There are some responsibilities and duties towards their priests who have dedicated their lives for us to lead us towards the kingdom of God.

²² Praying for our priests²² Help them at liturgical services²² According to the fifth precept of the Catholic Church, faithful are

obliged to assist with the material needs of the Church according to his her or own ability. ²² Helping them to spread of God's kingdom

1. Prepare three seperate tables to emphasize the tasks of

Deacon, Priest and Bishop.2. Write one difference between the Lay vocation and the

Religious vocation.3. Write a prayer you can say for your priests.4. Collect the information about your parish priest.5. Write two duties you can do towards your parish priest.6. Write a poem, appreciating the services of the parish priest.7. What are the three vows taken by the Religious priests?

For LifePray daily for the priests who serve you.

Activity

50

Religious Life

Religious Life is a life totally consecrated to God. It is a special vocation from God. Religious are called to follow Jesus,to love God above everything else, to be a sign of the glory of God's Kingdom. The Holy Spirit guides and inspires them in this commitment. Religious Congregations

Religious priests Religious who are not priests

Religious brothers Religious Sisters

picture 12.1 - Religious

12

51

Religious Congregations of Priests.

Priests who belong to Religious Congregations receive the sacrament of Holy Orders. Hence,they can celebrate the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. They live according to the Constitutions of the Order and are under a Superior. They try to live so as to proclaim God's Kingdom on earth.

These are some of the priests' religious congregations:

²² Oblates of Mary Immaculate - OMI²² Jesuits- SJ²² Sylvestro Benedictines- OSB²² Blessed Sacrament Congregation- SSS²² Franciscans' TOR²² Claretian Missionaries CMF

Congregations of Religious who are not priests. These are Religious Brothers & Sisters.They can distribute Holy Communion

Examples of Religious Brothers:

²² Marist Brothers FMS²² Franciscan Missionary Brothers CMSF²² De La Salle Brothers FSC²² Brothers of Charity FC

Examples of Religious Sisters:

²² Holy Family Sisters²² Apostolic Carmelites²² Good Shepherd Sisters²² Holy Angels Sisters²² Salvatorian Sisters²² Holy Cross Sisters (Menzingen)²² Dominican Sisters

52

All religious men and women belong to Congregatons. They have consecrated/committed their lives to God. They take the vows of

1. Poverty2. Obedience3. Chastity

They take their First Vows after a period of formation in the Novitiate. Then after some years (depending on the Constitutions of the Congregation) they take their Final Vows or Final Commitment. All religious help to build up the Kingdom of God. Their most important fields of work are Education and Social Work They also help in the building up of the Parish community. All who wish to enter the religious life have to receive an intense spiritual formation. Religious give their time,energy and talents to proclaim the Kingdom of God. They give witness to God's reign by the example of their lives.

Each Congregation/Institute works according to the objective or aim set out by their Founders/Foundresses. They continue the mission of Jesus Christ.

Name of CongregationFields of Service²² Oblates of Mary

Immaculate..

²² Sylvestro Benedictines

²² Marist Brothers

Preaching the Good News to the poor,conducting Retreats,serving in parishes,hospital chaplaincy.

Education, Parish work, living together in communion for the greater glory of God.

Education, Trainig self-employ ment youth.

53

²² De La Salle Brothers

²² Holy Family Sisters

²² Apostolic Carmel

²² Good Shepherd Sisters

²² Holy Angels Sisters

²² Salvatorian Sisters

²² Holy Cross Sisters

²² Dominicans

Education, Various services for youth

Education,Catechetics,Missionary work.

Education & Adult Education, Parish Work

Various services for young women, School Education,helping in the building up of the life of girls orphaned or gone astray

Education, Orphanages,Children,Young Women

Missionary, work Helping the poor & the Destitute, Parish Work

Health Service, Estate workers, Catechetics

Education,Pre-Schools, Catechetics, Parish work

54

Activity

It is the duty of the laity to help these religious who work for them. Given below are some of the ways in which lay people can help the religious:

²² Work with the religious in charitable services.²² Pray for the religious²² Respect them²² Help them in proclaiming the Kingdom of God.

You too can be called to the religious life. You can pray to receive such a vocation.

1. Write a creative essay in not more than 100 words. Include

the following points: Religious life is....... Religious life is a call from God. The sacredness of religious life2. Mention four ways in which you can help religious in their

services.

A thought for lifePray for a vocation to the priesthood or the religious life.

55

Vocation Of The Laity

The people in this picture are those who have chosen a profession according to their abilities. They serve the common people. They do these tasks as an employment. But, as Christians, we are called to commit ourselves to serve others for their good. We are thus called through the Sacrament of Baptism.

When we receive the Sacrament of Baptism the holy oils, with which we are anointed,make of us priests, prophets and kings. Through this anointing, we are called to the service of

1. (Royal) shepherds 2. Priests 3. Prophets

picture 13.1 - The people who help us

13

56

Thus, because of Baptism, every Christian receives the common vocation of the priesthood to bring Christ's redeeming love to the Christian community.

The common priesthood has a share in Christ's life as priest, shepherd and prophet. Except for Bishops, priests, clergy and religious, all the other people who have received Baptism, are called the lay people. The lay people proclaim God's kingdom in and through their daily tasks well performed. Those who have received the Sacrament of Holy Orders are officially known as priests.

As students of Grade 7, here are some of the services you can render, as those who belong to the common priesthood:

ProphetPriestShepherd²² Witness to God's Word

²² Proclaim the

truth

²² Read the Bible

daily

²² Read the Word

of God daily

²² Witness is righteousness and justice

²² Pray for each other

²² Be altar servers

²² Participate in liturgical

services

²² Be an active member

in the choir

²² Help the priest in the

liturgical services

²² Work in religious

groups with responsibility

²² Take leadership in

the school and serve

²² Help in Sunday School activities

²² Organize social work

to help the needy

57

The Groups & Committees which will help you to work with responsibility in the common priesthood:

Keeping the Church clean

Serving at Holy

Mass

Serving at MassAssisting the priestin liturgical services

Altar Servers

Union

Bear witness to fraternal life

Pray for each otherShare Christ's love with others

Lead an exemplary life.

Society ofHoly Childhood

58

Choir

Help in readings at Holy Mass

Make liturgy meaningful by participating in choir

Be trained for choir

Using talents & capabilities to praise God

Building up a good personality

Helping in Shramadana

Work in unity Child heroes

Improving your capabilities to be of service to God's kingdom

59

1. What are your responsibilities in the common priesthood ?

What active group in your parish will you choose to put them into practice ?

2. Give six points as to how you will work in accomplishing

your role in the common priesthood.

3. Choose one of the groups or committees in your parish

which you would like to join. Why do you like that committee or group? Give reasons.

A thought for lifeJoin the parish childrens' groups or clubs and serve in them.

Memorize this hymn :

Chorus We are God's children He has called us and chosen us Chosen us in Christ To work for the coming of His kingdom. 1. God gives us the Spirit of Christ That Christ may be wherever we are.

2. God gives us the Spirit of Christ That we may bring Good News to all.

3. God gives us the Spirit of Christ That we may spread His Kingdom of peace.

4. God gives us the Spirit of Christ That we may bring his justice to all.

Activity

60

The Sacrament Of Matrimony

In the above images you can see how the sacrament of Matrimony is administered. It is given in the Church. It is a social sacrament. It is a union blessed by God at the very beginning of creation. It is clear in this text from the Holy Bible:

The Lord God said, ‘It is not good that the man should be alone. I will make him a helpmate.’ (Genesis 2:18)

Matrimony is a Sacrament administered in the presence of the Lord. God blesses the couple who will be united in Holy Matrimony.

Matrimony is a covenant. The covenant is an union in love. Hence the couple getting married should live together in love and cooperation. There are two parties in a covenant. They are the bride and the groom. There must be witnesses in a covenant. Here it is the

priest official witness of the Church relatives, friends and well-wishers present who represent the society. Two responsible witnesses from these will sign officially.

picture 14.1 - Administering the Sacrament of Matrimony

14

61

Signs of a Christian marriage;

1. Unity. What is suggested here is that one man can marry only one woman and one woman can marry only one man. The married couple shares their joys and sorrows with one another and they live their lifetime in love and co-existence.

2. Continuity.

The married couple must live their entire lifetime until death, together. Divorce is not permitted in a Christian marriage. The quotation from the Bible given below confirms it:

“So they are no longer two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate.” (Matth 19:6)

The responsibilities of parents towards their children:

picture 14.2 - Providing education to the child

62

²² Provide love, protection and nourishment for children.²² Fulfil bodily,mental and spiritual needs for children.²² Provide the reception of the Sacraments at the due age for children.²² Bring up children in Christian faith.²² Provide a sound education for children.²² See that the children are admitted to schools which provide

Christianity (RC) as a subject.²² Provide education in a Catholic environment for childen.²² Bring up children who fulfil their responsibilities consciously.²² Bring up children who will live as good citizens.

²² Respecting and obeying your parents.²² Helping parents with their work.²² Helping parents in times of sadness and sickness.²² Caring for your aged parents.²² Looking after your younger brothers & sisters.²² Doing your best to have a good education.²² Always trying to please your parents.²² Living in peace & harmony with your siblings.

picture 14.3 - Aged mother

63

A Christian family can take example from the Holy Family of Nazareth

picture 14.4 -The Holy Family of Nazareth

1. At the Annunciation Mary said: “Be it done to me according to

thy Word.” In the same way, every member of the family should accept the will of God.2. Just as Mary,though she was the Mother of God, visited her cousin

Elizabeth, we must help others.3. St. Joseph showed care & concern for the family. Sacrificing his

comfort and even sleep, he took the mother and child to place of safety.4. At the Presentation, Joseph and Mary took the Child Jesus to

the temple to consecrate Him to the Lord. By obeying the law they lived an exemplary life.5. When Jesus was lost in the temple, Mary & Joseph showed how

they loved Jesus, by searching for Him until they found Him.6. Even though Jesus was the Son of God, He obeyed His parents.7. Jesus grew in age and wisdom. A child should learn well, behave

well and show how they fulfil the wishes of their parents. They must earn the praises of society.8. The event at the wedding feast at Cana shows how Jesus obeys

His mother and how the Holy Family helped others.

64

9. Mary stood at the foot of the Cross when Jesus was dying. It

shows how and when a member of the family is in difficulty, we must be with them and comfort them.10. When Jesus was dying on the cross, he gave His Mother to John,

the beloved disciple. In the same way, Jesus reminds us that we must provide and care for our parents when they grow old.

Taking the Holy Family as our example,we must live in obeying God's will and according to His plan for us.

1. Taking the facts given about the Sacrament of Matrimony

prepare a letter for a wall newspaper.2. What are the examples that a Christian family can take from

the life of the Holy Family? Give four examples.3. Mention five ways of living the examples taken from the life

of the Holy Family.4. Mention five ways in which you can help your parents in

their work.

A thought for lifeLet the virtues and good works of the Holy Family nourish you.

Activity

65

Obey & Respect Your Parents

1. I thank my God, Each time I think of you mum. And when I pray for you, I pray with joy.

2. I thank my God, Each time I think of you dad And when I pray for you, I pray with joy.

3. I thank my God Each time I think of you both. And when I pray for you, I pray with joy.

picture 15.1 - Respecting parents

15

66

Teacher: What did you feel when you were singing this hymn ?

Nirmal: That we must pray to God for our parents.

Rebecca: Our parents love us a lot. So, we must also love our parents much. We must also obey them. Isn't that so, teacher ?

Teacher: Yes, children. You are quite correct. The two most precious gifts that we received from God, are our life and our faith, and both of our parents. That is why, we must love God first and then love and respect our parents.

Rebecca: Teacher, doesn't the fourth commandment of the ten commandments also tell us that we must respect our parents?

Teacher: Yes Rebecca. We can divide the ten commandments into two main parts. The first part tells us how we must worship God. The second part tells us how we must love our neighbour. So,in the second part,the first thing we are told is, that we must love and respect our parents. Now do you understand how important this commandment is ?

Nirmal: Teacher,one day our Father told us in a sermon,that according to the fourth commandment just as we love our parents we must also love and respect our Church leaders, our teachers,our elders and the leaders of our country.

Teacher: You are correct, Nirmal. The fourth commandment teaches us that we must obey and respect all these persons. So children, from today onwards, in the home, in the school, in the Church and in society, try to live the fourth commandment in loving and respecting them.

67

From this dialogue, we can see clearly the meaning of the fourth commandment to love and respect our parents. Also,we see many occasions in society, when this commandment is not kept. So, when you see such instances,try to help them to see that it is wrong. It is your responsibility to help them to live as God's children. In the table below, you will see what your duties are in the fourth commandment to live as a Christian. Try to live these in your life.

Our duties towardsour parents.

³³ Obedience and respect to them³³ Helping in the household work³³ Trying to understand and accept the needs

and discomforts of the home.³³ Helping parents with their problems and sicknesses.

³³ To care for our parents in their old age

and to make them happy.³³ Pray daily for our parents.

Our duties towards priests and religious.

³³ Respect and obey them.³³ Helping the parish priests.³³ Working and helping in the lay apostolates

in the parish.³³ Take an active part in the liturgical

services of the parish.

Our duties to the School.³³ Respect and obey principals, teachers,

prefects.³³ Fulfil as best as we can, our duties and

responsibilities to the school.³³ Know the rules and regulations of the

school and observe them.³³ Use carefully our class text books,library

books,other books and materials of the school.

68

My promise to live the fourth

commandment.

I will obey,love,respect my parents, priests, religious, teachers, elders and leaders. On behalf of them all, and my parish,my school, my motherland, I promise from my young days to fulfil my obligations faithfully and totally.

1. Write five guidelines from the fourth commandment.2. Prepare a wall newspaper under the heading “Let us care

for our parents.” for your classroom.

A thought for life

³³ Visit an elder's home with your teacher or a

member of your family. Speak with fathers and mothers and listen to them there.³³ Get into the habit of paying obeisance to your

parents daily before you leave the house.

Our duties towards our country

³³ Appreciate and respect the leaders of the

country³³ Pray for them³³ Protect public & common property³³ Use natural resources economically and

carefully³³ Obey the civil law

Activity

69

Do Not Give False Witness

Hiran was a twenty - year old boy, who had ruined his educational career. Even during his school days he had got into the habit of doing corrupt actions. He began to feel very much that he needed money for these activities. He would do anything to have some money.

He got hold of kidney patients and other very ill people and put them into a van,took them to distant places and collected money by exposing them to people. Sometimes even if there were no patients, he would hire medical reports of sick people and show them in different villages and collect money. For some time Hiran went about like a beggar. Then one day because of his cunning actions even without his being aware he fell into the hands of the police. Hiran, who cheated so many people, was unable to cheat the police.

(Taken from a true story which appeared in the daily paper 'Lankadeepa' of 21.12.2014)

“To believe in something, and not to live it, is dishonest.”

“Honesty is the best policy.” These sayings show us the value of honesty. Society respects and values people who tell the truth. Society rejects people who lead double lives. The eighth commandment of the ten commandments tells us to speak the truth and to live the truth. Also through our baptismal vocation we are called to follow the God of truthfulness and to live a life of honesty.

The Holy Bible tells us that lying is a serious sin. Ananias and Saphira told a lie and they had a sudden death. (Acts5:1-11). The eighth commendment is:

“You shall not give false testimony against your neighbour." (Exodus 20:16)

16

70

“You shall not give false testimony against your neighbour.” (Deut 5:20)

This commandment teaches us that we must not give false witness against our neighbour. Also we cannot break promises we have made. It also reminds us that if we made a promise to God we must fulfil it.

In this text, Jesus is telling the Pharisees that what defiles a man is telling lies.

“What goes into someone’s mouth does not defile them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is what defiles them. But whatever comes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and it is this that makes someone unclean. For from the heart come evil intentions: murder, adultery, fornication, theft, perjury, slander. These are the things that make a person unclean.” (Matth 15:10-20)

This text from the Holy Bible shows us how we are made to give false witness. This type of 'thoughts' can influence us. These are evil intentions that come from Satan. The text below tells us this.

You belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out your father’s desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies. (John 8:44)

71

Also, St. Paul,in his letter to the Ephesians, advises us not to tell lies but to speak the truth.

Therefore each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to your neighbour, for we are all members of one body. (Ephesians 4:25)

We are told in the Catechism of the Catholic Church, that it is against the eighth commandment to falsify the truth in our relationships with our neighbour. Also if we are to witness to the great God of Truth, we must be honest in our words and actions, and follow the law of moral behaviour in our conscience.

The eighth commandment forbids misrepresenting the truth in our relations with others. This moral prescription flows from the vocation of the holy people to bear witness to their God who is the truth and wills the truth. Offenses against the truth express by word or deed a refusal to commit oneself to moral uprightness: they are fundamental infidelities to God and, in this sense, they undermine the foundations of the covenant. (CCC. No. 2464)

The conscience is God's voice. Always listen to your conscience and live.

Hence,through our Baptismal calling let us accept God as our Father and let us commit ourselves to create a society that respects the truth.

72

You can do much to build up a society that respects the truth.

Speak to your parents about the ways in which you can build up a society that respects and practises truthfulness and then fill the following table.

What I can do at home.

What I can do in school.

What I can doin the parish.

What I can doin society.

1 ................2 ................3 ................4 ................5 ................

1 .................2 .................3 .................4 .................5 .................

1 .................2 .................3 .................4 .................5 .................

1 .................2 .................3 .................4 .................5 .................

A thought for lifeSpeak the truth always. Live accordingly.

I can do

Telling the truth

always

Not spreading

false rumours

Not speaking about persons or things I know

nothing about.

Being honest

Activity

73

Do Not Steal

Dear son/daughter, won't you feel sad if you had something you valued much and you lost it? Think for a moment. If you steal something from another won't they too feel the same as you felt? As children of God, from your young days, try to obey the seventh commandment. The seventh commandment is: “Do not

steal.” Trying to steal what belongs to another. Also causing damage to things that belong to another. These are forbidden by the seventh commandment. So, avoid stealing what belongs to others even for fun, as a joke or for your pleasure.

In our daily life we can have many a problem where we need money and we do not have it. On these occasions we should not steal what belongs to another. We must try to control ourselves and try to live honestly. Also practicing justice will help us to protect the rights of others and to give them what rightly belongs to them. Then it will be easy for us to live the seventh commandment.

When you borrow something from another, try to return it as soon as you can. If you pick up something that does not belong to you try to give it back to the owner as soon as you can. Or, hand it over to a person in charge, e. g. the principal, a teacher. Jesus praised Zacchaeus for promising to return what he had stolen. “If I have taken something from another unjustly, I promise to return it four times more.” (Luke 19:8). Zacchaeus willingly paid back what he had stolen. You too can be a child of God, if you have done something wrong, by trying to put it right.

17

74

So, we must receive property, valuables, goods, money by

³³ working honestly³³ buying³³ exchanging³³ gifts³³ inheritingIf we own property, valuables, money by any other means it is a grave sin. We reject being children of God.

What is forbidden by this commandment;

³³ Stealing. ³³ Taking by force³³ Unjust distribution³³ Destroying other's property

I will love all that belong to me.I will value and protect all that belong to others. likewise

Taking bribes

Other ways of how stealing is done

Crafty

Deceiving and cheating

Not paying a just wage

Lowering the quality of goods

75

God is the owner of all

property

Thus, by the seventh commandment we are called to protect God's treasures. As children of God and accepting God's will, we must use with care the goods and property entrusted to us. We must not collect goods by cheating. We must not destroy or damage goods which belong to others.

Now, can you remember your responsibilities?

1. Name four means of obtaining goods justly.2. Name four actions forbidden by the fourth commandment.3. Write an essay of not more than 50 words on the topic:

What can I do to obey the seventh commandment?

A thought for life.Just as you make an effort to protect your belongings, also make an effort to protect the belongings of others.

Activity

76

Do Not Covet Your Neighbour's Goods

So, there is a connection by nature that man shows a liking, an attachment, to what is pleasing to him/her.e. g. A longing for tasty and appetizing food. A longing for fine clothes. Likes to live in a spacious and comfortable house. Likes to own a luxury vehicle.

Because of this attachment, liking and willingness, man wants to own certain things. Sometimes one wants and shows a longing to have even what belongs to others. They can even have a longing to possess these things, to envy others. Coveting others' goods is against the tenth commandment. If these envious thoughts draw one to steal, it is against the seventh commandment. The seventh commandment forbids one to steal. The tenth commandment forbids covetousness which draws one to steal. This is also a sin.

The indigenous Red Indians of America showed the leaders of America how envying others' land can be wrong. Seattle in his speech showed how covetousness is against the seventh and the tenth commandments.

Noble leader of Washington,You have informed us that you wish to buy our land. You have also showed us your friendship and goodwill. If we do not agree to sell our land the white man will come with his gun and take our land by force.

18

So, one must be happy with what one has and not covet the goods of others. The Catholic Catechism tells us this:

77

These commandments forbid us to unjustly desire or own or to be jealous of the goods of others. (CCC 300)

The tenth commandment teaches us to be content with what we have. It forbids us to unjustly own others' goods, to keep such goods, to have a desire or to be jealous of others' possessions. It also forbids us to be jealous of the success of others. A man who lives in a hut sees the luxurious mansion just in front of his home. He is not jealous of him. He does not envy him. He rejoices in their good fortune. Such a man is a true noble human.

But, getting what belongs to others by just means is not forbidden by this commandment. (CCC 2537) For example, Buying a television set from the shop.

The first thought that incites a person to sin, is envy. The prophet Micah shows us how this envious thought can turn into action and how it can alienate us from God, from our neighbour and from our brother.

Woe to those who plan iniquity, to those who plot evil on their beds! At morning’s light they carry it out because it is in their power to do it. They covet fields and seize them, and houses and take them. They defraud people of their homes. They rob them of their inheritance. (Micah 2:1-2)

The universe is God's creation. God is the owner of His creation. The catechelism of the Catholic church teaches us that we must be aware of this fact and live in an attitude of detachment.

78

Jealousy is a sin. It is born when we begin to covet others' goods. It brings in us sadness and regret. But if we live content with what we have we will be happy.

We have received all from God. We cannot live in this world forever. So, in the short time that we spend on this earth, let us live thanking and praising God for all He has given us. This commmandment teaches us this.

We have to be aware as children of God that we must commit ourselves and take the responsibility to safeguard the property of others.

What we must do to live the tenth commandment:

³³ Be content with what you have.³³ Do not try to own others' goods.³³ In buying and selling, be just.³³ Work honestly for the wages you receive.³³ You must return what you have borrowed from others.³³ When you find something that belongs to another, return it to the

owner.³³ When others do well and succeed, do not be jealous of them, but

rejoice with them.

1. “Do not covet others' goods.” Write an essay of not more

than 75 words on this subject.

Activity

A thought forHappy with what we have received.

79

Devotion Of The Rosary

During the time of His Holiness Pope Pius V, threats were being directed to the Catholic Church by the Turkish people. So he asked the European people to take action to protect the Church. As a response to the Pope's ap-peal they prepared an army. But they did not have enough train-ing in war to be able to fight the enemy. On the day of the battle

they went to fight while saying the Rosary devoutly. During this war, the Pope invited all the people of Europe to join in the recitation of the Rosary. There was a procession of people reciting the Rosary.

At the Battle of Lepanto they were able to defeat the Turkish army. If the Turkish people won this war, then they could have invaded Italy and a Turkish Sultan would have become the head of the Roman Empire. This victory which took place on 7th October 1571 was because of the power of the Rosary. They all believed that.

Because of this victory, Pope Pius V, in 1573, declared the 7th October as “The Feast of our Lady of Victory.” In 1573,Pope Gregory XIII, changed the feast of October 7th to “Our Lady of the Rosary.” In 1716, Pope Clement XI declared that this feast be celebrated in the whole of the Catholic Church.

picture 19.1 - Rosary

19

80

The Catholic Church has had many a blessing during troubled and decisive times, by reciting the Rosary. That is why the Catholic Church recommends the recital of the Rosary by the faithful.

The History of the Rosary

The devotion of the “Rosary” has a long history in the Church.

³³ In about the third century A.D. the monks of the Eastern

Church began the devotion of the Rosary.³³ In the year 1214 A.D. St. Dominic Gusman, a Spanish, introduced

the devotion of the Rosary. The Rosary we recite today came from St. Dominic.

When we recite the Rosary we contemplate the mysteries of salvation. These are the Birth, Passion, Death and Ressurection of Jesus Christ. As the Mission of Christ was left out in the above-mentioned mysteries, Pope John Paul II added the Luminous or Mysteries of Light.

DaysMysteries

Monday, Saturday, Sundays of Advent &Christmas-tide.

Joyful

1. The Annunciation2. The Visitation3. The Birth of Jesus4. The Presentation of Jesus in the Temple.5. The Finding of Jesus in the Temple

Tuesdays,Fridays, Sundays of Lent

Sorrowful Mysteries

1. The Agony of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane.2. The Scourging of Jesus at the Pillar.3. The Crowning of Jesus with Thorns.4. Jesus Carries His Cross.5. Jesus is Crucified and Dies.

81

Wednesdays, Sundays of Eastertide &Ordinary Sundays.

Glorious

1. The Resurrection of Jesus.2. The Ascension of Jesus into Heaven.3. The Descent of the Holy Spirit on Mary & the Apostles.4. The Assumption of Mary into Heaven.5. The Crowning of Mary in Heaven

Thursdays.Luminous

1. The Baptism of Jesus.2. The Miracle at Cana3. The Proclamation of the Kingdom4. The Transfiguration of Jesus5. The Institution of the Eucharist.

The ordinary Rosary or the Rosary for the dead can be used. The prayers that are usually said at the Rosary can be used. It is very necessary to recite the Rosary daily as a family.

“If we wish to be united to Mary, our Mother, there is no better way than to recite the Rosary” says Pope John Paul II. So let us as a family recite the daily Rosary.

82

The ordinary Rosary ( said daily)

²² The sign of the cross.²² The Apostles Creed²² The Our Father²² Three Hail Marys(Before each Hail Mary the following short prayers can be said also)

Before 1st Hail MaryMost pure Mother of God, pray for us to God to increase our faith (Hail Mary).

Before 2nd Hail MaryMost holy Mary, Mother of Jesus, pray for us before your Son Jesus, to increase our hope.

Before 3rd Hail Mary Most Holy Mary, filled with the Holy Spirit, pray for us to grow in our love of God.

²² Glory be to the Father....... ²² O my Jesus (Prayer of Fatima)²² Meditation on the Mystery²² Our Father.²² Ten Hail Marys²² Glory be to the Father.......²² O my Jesus ²² Hail Holy Queen²² Angelus²² Litany

Follow the same pattern of prayer for the five my steries.

83

Some of the litanies which may be used are:

²² Litany of the Sacred Heart ( e.g on Fridays)²² Litany of our Lady²² Litany of St. Anthony (e.g. Tuesdays)²² Litany of St. Sebastian²² Litany of St. Jude

Rosary for the Dead

May be said during the month of November, when a Christian dies or at the anniversary of a death.

²² Glory be to the Father...²² On the cross: Sacred Heart of Jesus I believe in you.²² In place of the Our Father: O my God, I believe in You because

you are the Truth. Because You fulfil Your promises I hope in You. Because You are compassionate and merciful I love You.

²² In place of the Hail Mary:

Jesus, Mary --- Jesus, Mary, Joseph

²² At the end of each decade:

Loving Heart of Jesus be my love. Loving heart of Mary, be my salvation

²² At the end

Jesus, Mary, Joseph I offer you my heart and soul. Jesus, Mary, Joseph, assist me in my last agony. Jesus, Mary, Joseph, may I breathe forth my soul in your peace.

²² Litany for the dead.

84

1. Who introduced the devotion to the recital of the Rosary

?2. Name the four types of mysteries that we meditate on

when we say the Rosary.3. Memorize these prayers and recite them before your

subject teacher:

²² Hail Holy Queen²² The Angelus²² O my Jesus.....

There is no better weapon to fight against the threats and challenges thrown to our Church today; also to the problems and difficulties in our personal lives. We must pray the Rosary daily as a family. Then we can be heirs to a family life filled with God's blessings.

A thought for LifeMemorize the prayers used when reciting the Rosary for the dead.

Activity

85

Novenas & Feast Days

Jude: Mother......the smell of milkrice...!!..milkrice for lunch ?

Mother: Did you forget son, that today we are hoisting the flag for the Church feast?

Jude: Oh yes... I nearly forgot! ( to his sister) Akka, we can eat a lot of milkrice today.

Stella: Yes, you want only to eat...Mother this time for the Church feast and for the novena I want two dresses with the latest fashions.

Mother: A Church feast does not mean eating or dressing fashionably.

Both: Then, Mother?

Mother: Children, these are the days when we must come closer and closer to God. Also we, parishioners must all get together and pray to the Saint to whom the Church is dedicated. Like good children now get ready to go to Church.

Each year, in our various parishes the feasts of different Saints are commemorated. For example we can speak of Easter and Christmas. These feasts are celebrated universally and in Sri Lanka on the same day. Besides these there are special feasts for each Church. These are the feast days of the Saints to which the Church is consecrated. The parish preist celebrates this feast with the parishioners.

20

86

Reasons for celebrating Church feasts.

²² To have a renewal in the spiritual life of parishioners²² To nourish our life with the Word of God.²² To thank the Saint of the parish for the many blessings and

graces bestowed on the parish through the intercession of the particular Saint.²² To reflect on the life examples the Saint has left us and to

model our lives accordingly.²² To entrust the future of the parish and the parishioners to the

Saint of the parish. The meaning of the hoisting of the flag:

The feast of the patron Saint of the parish begins with the hoisting of the flag. When the first missionaries began their work in our country, there were not enough priests for the parishes. A priest came to the parish only once in many months or even only once a year. The priest then stayed

over in the parish for a week or two to see to the spiritual needs of the parishioners. The feast of the patron Saint of the parish was also celebrated then. The parishioners were made aware of the arrival of the priest by the hoisting of the flag.

Novenas

Once the flag was raised, the Novenas in preparation for the feast, began. The word “Novena” comes from the Latin word “Novem.” It means “Nine”. What it means is that for nine days the people prayed for special favours for themselves and for the parish, asking the Saint to intercede for them. After the raising of the flag, eight

picture 20.1 - of the hoisting of the flag

87

days are for the novenas. On the ninth day Vespers is celebrated. This is an evening liturgical service celebrated with the priests. On the tenth day the feast is celebrated. This is the custom of the Catholic Church. The background for this period in the parish is the feast of Pentecost - the coming of the Holy Spirit. After the Ascension of Jesus the Apostles & Mary with about 120 followers of Jesus, were gathered in a room and were praying in preparation for the coming of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit descended on them on the tenth day. Like them, we too must pray during the preparation for the Church feast, to receive spiritual benefits for all. For that we must:

²² participate in the daily Novenas.²² attend Holy Mass and receive Holy Communion.²² spend time for prayer more than on other days.²² make a good confession and have a spiritual renewal.²² participate at the Vespers and at the feast day Holy Mass.²² participate in the procession with devotion and piety.

The duties of the Parish priests are:

²² to make the faithful aware that during the period of the Church

feast they must give priority to their spiritual renewal.²² during the days of the Novenas choose appropriate texts and

themes for preaching and reflection.²² to direct the faithful to participate fully in the daily Mass and

other devotional celebrations.²² to direct the faithful to receive the Sacrament of Reconciliation

with true repentance.²² focusing on the needs of the times, to organise meritorious acts

in the parish.

The Church feast is a time of special blessings for the people and the parish. Also it is an appropriate time to be grateful to God for the many blessings received. Hence, the faithful must remember

88

to make the Church feast truly a time of spiritual renewal and not make use of it just to show off. In a spirit of sharing to make of the Church feast a pleasant and joyful occasion for all.

1. What did the hoisting of the Church flag mean earlier,

in the history of the Church in Sri Lanka ?2. Explain the meaning of “Novena”.3. Mention three ways in which you can make the annual

Church feast a meaningful one.4. Write a wall newspaper article about the Saint to whom

your parish is dedicated. Take the following facts into consideration.

²² The name of the Saint to whom your parish is dedicated.²² The date on which the Catholic Church celebrates the

feast of this Saint.²² The date on which your parish celebrates the feast.²² Some facts about his/her life.²² What examples can we take from his/her life?

A thought for lifeLet us receive the sacrament of Reconciliation and participate in our Church feast.

Activity

89

Vespers & Benediction

Hymn:

1. My soul proclaims the Lord my God My Spirit sings His praise He looks on me, He fills me up And gladness fills my days.

2. All nations now will share my joy His gifts He has out poured His little ones He has made great I magnify the Lord.

3. His mercy is forever more His name I praise again His strong right arm Puts down the proud and raises lowly ones.

4. He fills the hungry with good things The rich He sends away The promise made to Abraham Is filled by Him each day.

The origin of this hymn is Luke; 1:46-55. It is known as the Magnificat. During the evening service or Vespers we reflect on this hymn of our Mother Mary.

21

90

Liturgy Of The Hours

Liturgy of the Hours is a liturgical celebration at certain hours of the day. It is a prayer of praise including the Psalms.

This type of prayer is not something new to our celebrations of prayers. It is a custom from ancient times. The prayer is based on the Bible. When the Jews prayed in the Synagogue, they used the Book of Psalms from the Bible. In these prayers an essential item was the use of the psalms.

In the olden times these prayers were said by the priests, religious and laity. Later as they became complex the laity abandoned these prayers. The priests and religious are bound to say these prayers daily.According to the custom of the Jews, a feast began with the setting of the sun the previous evening with a prayer of the Liturgy of the Hours. In our Churches today, this service is known as Vespers. It is held on the eve of the feast. It is an evening service. The laity too participate in this service today.

We can name the liturgy of the hours as:

1. Morning prayer or Lauds 3. Evening prayer/Vespers2. Prayer at noon 4. Night prayer

picture 21.1 - Reciting the Liturgy of the Hours

91

The programme for Vespers.

²² Three hymns (two psalms and a canticle from the Bible)²² Scripture Reading²² Homily²² Magnificat. Mary's Song of Praise²² Apostles Creed or I Believe....²² Our Father or The Lord's Prayer²² Prayer²² Benediction of the Most Blessed Sacrament.

The evening Vespers ends with the Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament. We honour our Lord Jesus living in the sacred host. The Eucharist. We place all our needs before the living God. We must permit our Lord Jesus Christ to let His blessings flow into us. Hence, this moment is very important for us. We must receive this solemn blessing on our knees. Also when the Blessed Sacrament is exposed on the altar in the monstrance we must genuflect on both knees and pay homage to Jesus.Besides the evening Vespers, Benediction can also be given on;

²² the first Thursday or Friday of each month.²² the feast of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ or

Corpus Christi.²² Retreats.²² the Day of the Sick at Tewatta.

The Liturgy of the Hours is a prayer of praise to the Creator, God our Father. We can participate in the celebrations by joining the parish priests in the preparation for vespers, helping to keep the Church and the premises clean and tidy. Also by joining in the services with great devotion and piety. It is our duty as Christians.

92

1. Explain why these services are known as the “Liturgy

of the Hours.”2. What is the book that is mostly used in the Liturgy of

the Hours ?3. What is the occasion when we as the lay people must

participate in the Liturgy of the Hours ?4. Name three occasions when Benediction of the Blessed

Sacrament can be given.

A thought for lifeLet us thank and praise God our Father for every blessing He gives us.

Activity

93

The Way Of The Cross

It is clear that the purpose of this pilgrimage is to make the Way of the Cross. The Way of the Cross is a devotion where we meditate on the sufferings and death of Jesus.

T

he

A

nn

ual

P

ilg

rim

ag

e o

f

th

e

Wa

y

of

th

e

Cro

ss

o

f t

he

P

ari

sh

Come, let us as children of the same family, reflect on the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ

Place: The Calvary Shrine at Hiniduma. Date: February 25th Departure Parish:4.00 a.m.from Hiniduma: 4.30 p.m.Cost of Journey: Rs. 300/= per person

Please note:As the number of seats are limited, kindly pay your money and reserve the seats before 11th February.

22

The history of the Way of the Cross

As it is mentioned in the tradition of the Church, Mary our Mother accompanied our Lord Jesus Christ on His Way of the Cross. It is mentioned that after Emperor Constantine gave Christians the freedom to follow their religion, the important places of Jesus'

94

way of the cross were marked. Christians made their way of the cross by following these places. They had to go to the Holy Land (Palestine) for this. But, after the 5th century, various countries of the world built their own calvaries and stations for the way of the cross of Jesus.

The Stations of the Way of the Cross

During the devotion of the Way of the Cross we commemorate the Passion of Jesus from the condemnation to death by Pilate until He was laid in the tomb. It is made up of 14 Stations. First Station Second Station

Jesus is condemned to death

Jesus carries His cross

Third Station Fourth Station

Jesus meets His afflicted Mother Jesus falls the first time.

95

Fifth Station Sixth Station

Seventh Station Eighth Station

Veronica wipes the face of JesusSimon of Cyrene helps Jesus to carry His cross

The Women of Jerusalem weep for JesusJesus falls the second time

Jesus is stripped of His garmentsJesus falls the third time

Ninth Station Tenth Station

96

Jesus is nailed to the CrossJesus dies on the cross.

Jesus is taken down from the cross and placed in the arms of His Mother.

Jesus is placed in the tomb.

Eleventh Station Twelfth Station

Thirteenth Station Fourteenth Station

The Way of the Cross is made like this

²² Name the Station. e. g. 1st Station.²² Verse: We adore Thee O Christ and we bless Thee.²² Response: Because by your holy cross you have redeemed the

world.²² Reflection.²² Lord's prayer, Hail Mary, Glory be...²² Prayer

97

²² Prayer: Have mercy on us Lord, ²² Response : Have mercy on us.²² Verse: May the souls of the faithful departed rest in peace.²² Response: Amen.²² Hymn: At the cross her station keeping Stood the holy Mother weeping Close to Jesus to the last.

We recall the painful way of the cross of Jesus. We must participate in this devotion with great piety and in prayer. We must try to share in the sufferings of Jesus. We can make the Way of the Cross on Fridays in Lent or on any day. Meditating on the sufferings of Jesus helps us to bear our little pains and aches meaningfully and joyfully for the sake of Jesus.

1. What do we recall in the Way of the Cross ? 2. What is the historical background to this devotion ? 3. Explain how one makes the Way of the Cross.

Activity

A thought for lifeDuring the season of Lent, we must make the Way of the Cross by ourselves or in a group as often as possible.

98

The Holy Hour

Among the many devotions in the Catholic Church, the Holy Hour occupies an important place. It is to spend about an hour before the Blessed Sacrament or in any quiet place. It can be done anywhere. The main thing is to reflect or meditate and spend the time in prayer.

The history of the Holy Hour.

In 1673 A.D. St. Margaret Mary Alocoque had a vision where she was invited by Jesus to be part of His sufferings and agony at Gethsamane. She accepted the invitation and started to pray for an hour meditating on the Passion of Jesus. So, it is a devotion begun by Jesus Himself through St. Margaret Mary. We recall the plea made by Jesus to His Apostles in His sufferings at Gethsamane: “Could you not watch one hour with me?” (Matthew 26:40).

The occasions when we can pray the Holy Hour

²² On Holy Thursday.²² On Thursday or Friday weekly.²² When celebrating the feast of Corpus Christi/ the Body and

Blood of Jesus Christ.²² As a Parish group or as a family or for a special need. This is

a devotion can be done at any time.

picture 23.1 - Adoration before the

Blessed Sacrament.

23

99

Blessed Mother Theresa made the Holy Hour daily and she recommended it for the Sisters of her Congregation.This devotion can be done individually or in a group. There are different ways in which it can be done:

²² In the Church or in chapels before the Blessed Sacrament

exposed.²² In the home, assembled as a family.

The purpose of the Holy Hour.

²² To share in the sufferings of Jesus at Gethsamane.²² For a special need.²² When a solution to a problem cannot be found to seek the

assistance of Jesus.

The traditional way of making the Holy Hour.

This is the accepted way:

²² Begin with a hymn.²² Introductory prayer²² 1st Quarter - prayer and reflection. Silence²² 2nd Quarter - prayer and reflection. Silence²² Hymn²² 3rd Quarter - prayer and reflection. Silence²² 4th Quarter - prayer and reflection. Silence²² Hymn²² Final prayer.²² Hymn.

100

Prayers, division of time can be adjusted by the leader of the prayer group. Our duty as Christians is to participate with devotion and prayerfully each time this devotion is made as a family or as a community.

1. What was the invitation or the call given to St. Margaret

Mary through vision?2. Name two occasions on which you can make a Holy

Hour.3. Name two purposes for making the Holy Hour.4. On what do we reflect when we make the Holy Hour ?

Activity

A thought for life.Use the prayers, hymns of the Holy Hour in an appropriate manner.

101

Adoration Of The Holy Eucharist and

Procession

We, as Catholics believe that Jesus is truly present in the most Blessed Sacrament. This has been confirmed by a miracle. We must give the Eucharist our highest veneration. That is why, whenever it is possible, we go to the Church and adore the Blessed Sacrament. There are other reasons why we adore the Blessed Sacrament.

²² To worship the living Jesus present in the Blessed Sacrament.²² To create a deep relationship with Jesus through prayer.²² To ask for our spiritual and material needs.²² To place our successes and failures,our joys and pains before

Him.²² To thank Jesus for all blessings and graces received.

When we can visit Jesus

²² Whenever it is possible for us.²² When the Blessed Sacrament is exposed in the Church.²² When there is Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament.

picture 24.1 - The Monstrance

24

102

²² Whenever we pass by the Church.²² When we place our needs before Him.

Whenever we venerate the Blessed Sacrament we can receive a renewal in our spiritual life.

The procession of the Blessed Sacrament

The procession of the Blessed Sacrament is held to offer Jesus our adoration and praise and to receive His blessings. Another purpose of the procession is to invoke blessings on the town/village we are and on the people. We should help to organize this procession which has such good purposes. We can do the following:

²² Help to decorate the chariot in which the Blessed Sacrament

will be taken in procession.²² Participate in the hymns and the prayers during the procession.²² Not indulge in unnecessary talking while in the procession.²² Walk in twos or threes in an organized manner.²² Be dressed simply and modestly.

As the Blessed Sacrament is kept in our Church we must not disrespect it or behave badly in any way. Hence

²² Be silent when inside the Church.²² Genuflect and pay homage to the Eucharistic Lord.²² Walk modestly when you are inside the Church.

103

1. Give three occasions when, as Catholics, we should visit

Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament.2. Mention three ways in which you can help when organizing the procession of the Blessed Sacrament.3. Mention three ways of how you should behave when the

Blessed Sacrament is reserved in the Church.

A thought for lifeVisit Jesus when you pass by a Church.

Activity

104

Pilgrimages

Dear Devotees,

You have come to this sacred place of pilgrimage because you look forward to a spiritual renewal. So,

²² All members of your family must receive the Sacrament of Reconciliation.²² Participate fully in the Holy Mass and receive the Holy Eucharist.(Communion).²² Participate without fail in all devotions.²² Be well-mannered.²² Obey the common rules and regulations of this place.²² Be dressed modestly.²² Use the common resources economically and carefully.²² Avoid drinking alcohol and amusements.²² Work in unity with others.²² Return to your parish, your village and to your family as a renewed person.

God bless you all ! Administrator of the Shrine.

This notice shows that a place of pilgrimage is sacred; also how we should behave and act in such a place.

25

105

In the face of one's daily needs, responsibilities, and challenges those who are faced with difficulties, make a pilgrimage seeking for spiritual renewal and consolation. These journeys remind us of our pilgrimage to eternity. Also for those who wish for a renewal of life, this is an unique occasion through prayer.

The purpose of pilgrimages

³³ To worship the one, true living God, as a family.³³ To offer thanks for graces received from God.³³ To place our spiritual and material needs before the Lord.³³ To visit places of pilgrimage.³³ To experience the mighty deeds of our Father in heaven.

The Shrine of Our Lady of Madhu

During the persecution of the Church by the Dutch, the Catholics of Mannar had to face many difficulties. In the year 1670 A.D. about 20 devoted Catholic families left all their property and went to the Kandyan region which was under the Dutch authorities. They took with them on their journey a miraculous statue of our Lady which was kept in a Church in “Maanthai”. Arriving at a village known as ' Maradha Madhu' they spent their time there in

picture 25.1 - Madhu shrinepicture 25.2 - Madhu statue

106

faith and prayer. Among about 700 people who had fled to Jaffna was a young lady known as Helena. She worked in the Kandyan king's office and got married to the Chief Officer there. With his help she built a Church consecrated to our Lady of Madhu in the Marada Madhu village.

Later, with the aid of the Oratorian Bishops and Rev. Fathers of the Congregation of St. Joseph Vaz the Madhu Shrine which we see today was built.

The Shrine of St. Anne at Talawila

picture 25.3 - Church of St. Anne

picture 25.4 - Staue St. Anne

During the latter half of the 18th century, a ship belonging to the European merchants, sank off the shores of Talawila. A statue of St. Anne had been in that ship. The people in that ship had prayed to St. Anne to save their lives. When they arrived on shore, deprived of all their belongings, they had no shelter except a Nuga tree. The merchant installed the statue in a hollow of the tree. Before leaving the place, the merchant made a vow to St. Anne. That is, if his trade was a success he would return nd build a shrine dedicated to St. Anne. Then he arrived in Galle and his business was successful. He returned to the place and built a Church there. The Church

107

has developed into what we see today because of the miracles that have been worked through her intercession.

The Basilica of our Lady of Lanka

During World War 11, bombs were dropped in Colombo and Trincomalee by the Japanese. Archbishop John Mary Masson OMI who was the then Archbishop of Colombo made a vow at the Grotto of our Lady of Lourdes beside the small Church at Tewatte. He would erect a Basilica at Tewatte if our Lady saved our country from this dangerous situation. As the country was saved from the ravages of war, this vow was fulfilled by Archbishop Thomas Cardinal Cooray, in his name after obtaining permission from the Holy See a Basilica consecrated to Our Lady of Lanka was built at Tewatte.

picture 25.5 - Basilica of our Lady of Lanka at Tewatte

picture 25.6 - Statue

108

The Church of Our Lady of Victory at Matara

picture 25.7 - Photo of churchpicture 25.8 - Statue

Some fishermen at Weligama found a statue made of ashwood. It was the statue of “Our Lady of Victory of Matara.” It was 26 inches long. The staue was like Our Lady Queen of Heaven. They handed it over to the parish priest of Matara Church. It was found out that the statue was more than 400 years old. In 2004 this statue was washed away by the Tsunami. But it was recovered. Many miracles took place because of this statue. The feast is celebrated on the birthday of our Lady- September 8th. It is mentioned that the present Church was erected by Rev. Fr. A. Closet SJ in 1907.

picture 25.9 - Holy Land

The Holy Land

The country where Jesus was born, where he carried out His mission, where He suffered and died is referred to as the Holy Land. It is a place of pilgrimage for the Christians.

109

Padua

The relics of St. Antony of the Franciscans are interred in theBasilica at Padua in Italy. The Saint's tongue is found intact due to the fact that he always spoke the truth when he was sharing the Word of God.

The relic of the tongue which has not decayed is placed in a casket and kept on the altar. His chin, lower jaw,the clothes that he used, his coffin are all preserved and kept for seeing and venerating by the people. Many devotees visit the shrine of St. Antony at Padua with faith and for favours.

Goa

St. Francis Xavier's undecayed body is preserved in the “Bomb Jesus” basilica in Goa, Many go there to see and also for a spiritual renewal. Another reason why it is popular is because it is the birth place of St. Joseph vaz.

picture 25.10 - Basilica at Padua

picture 25.11 - “Bomb Jesus” basilica in Goa

We can see that there are many places of pilgrimage in other countries. When we visit these places we must do so with awe and reverence in order to receive graces and blessings. It is also our responsiblity.

110

1. Mention three reasons why we go on a pilgrimage.2. Mention four actions we can perform to guard the sacredness

of the place.3. Give a reason to each as to why the Holy Land, Padua and

Goa are places of pilgrimage.

Activity

A thought for lifeGo on pilgrimages, not for pleasure and enjoyment, but for a spiritual renewal.

Except Pictures 11.9, 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 15.1 Other pictures were obtained from the internet.