==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

Grade 9

GEOGRAPHY

Educational Publications Department

To obtain textbooks in electronic mediumwww.edupub.gov.lk

ii

First Print 2017

Second Print 2018

Third Print 2019

All Rights Reserved

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Nimthara Printers. No. 30/1, Temple Road,Pattiwila, Gonawala, Kelaniya.

ISBN 978-955-25-0166-1

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaSundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana LankaDhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye mathaPiliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo MathaOba we apa vidyaObamaya apa sathyaOba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthiOba apa aloke Apage anupraneOba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba weNava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran mathaGnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi karaEka mavakage daru kela bevinaYamu yamu vee nopamaPrema vada sema bheda dureradaNamo, Namo MathaApa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

xu jha; kf;fs; ehkhNthk;xd;Nw ehk; thOk; ,y;yk;ed;Nw clypy; XLk;xd;Nw ek; FUjp epwk;

mjdhy; rNfhjuu; ehkhNthk;xd;wha; thOk; tsUk; ehk; ed;wha; ,t; ,y;ypdpNyeyNk tho;jy; Ntz;Lkd;Nwh

ahtUk; md;G fUizAld;xw;Wik rpwf;f tho;e;jpLjy;nghd;Dk; kzpAk; Kj;Jky;y - mJNtahd;W kopahr; nry;tkd;Nwh.

Mde;j rkuf;Nfhd; ftpijapd; ngau;g;G.

v

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all. This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders. Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim. It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education. I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam

Minister of Education

Being innovative, changing with right knowledge Be a light to the country as well as to the world.

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experi-ences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,

Commissioner General of Educational Publications,

Educational Publications Department,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2019.04.10

vii

Monitoring and Supervision-W. M. Jayantha WickramanayakaCommissioner General Educational Publications Department

Direction-W.A. Nirmala PiyaseeliCommissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination-S. Dakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

-A. M. R. K. Adikari Assistant CommissionerEducational Publications DepartmentBoard of Editors1. Prof. N.K. Dhangalla (Emeritus Professor)-University of Kelaniya

2. Prof. S. A. Nortbert-University of Colombo

3. Kusum P. Ranasinha-Visiting Lecturer Ocean University

4. R.P. Peiris -Additional Commissioner (Retired)Department of Examinations

5. M. P. Ranjani Dhanawardhana-Director, Department of Social SciencesNational Institute of Education

6. S. Karunagaran-Senior LecturerNational Institute of Education

Boards of Writers

1. N.A. Chithralatha -ISA, Zonal Education Office, Matara

2. K.K.U. Gunarathna-Teacher Service,Ga/Polpagoda M.V. Yakkalamulla

3. W.K.P. Dharmawardhana-Teacher Service St. Peter's M.M.V. Negombo

viii

4. Karunasinghe Somadasa-ISA (English), Zonal Education Office Matara

5. D.M.J. Bandara-Teacher Service Kuli/Saranath M.V.Kuliyapitiya

6. W.A.A.R. Weragoda-Teacher Service Girls' High School Kandy

7. Yalini Karunagaran-Teacher ServiceSt. Clare's College Colombo 06

8. T. Sharamila Dharshini-Teacher Service K/W/Rajawella Hindu National College Digana

9. S. Ilankovan -Teacher Service Bt/KK/Karuwakerny Vigneswara College, Valachchanai

10. T. Sri Sureshkumar-ADE, Zonal Education Office Matale

Language Editing

1. H. Dahanayaka-Chief Editor (Retired)Educational Publications DepartmentProof Editing

1. H.P.K. Hettiarachchi-Teacher Service Piliyandala Central CollegePiliyandala Cover Page

1. R.A. Ureka Dilrukshi-Technical Assistance Educational Publications Department

Technical Assistance

1. Abisheka Ranasinghege-Technical Assistance Educational Publications Department

ix

1. The Asian Region

2. Landscape of Sri Lanka

3. Spatial changes of Development in Sri Lanka

4. Environmental Balance

5. Reading of 1:50 000 Topographic Maps of Sri Lanka

ix

Index

01

23

67

75

83

x

The aim of this chapter is to learn the important information on

the Asian Region.

1

The Asian Region

2For free distribution

Geographical location of Asia

Relative Location

The continent of Asia is located in the Eastern part of the Northern Hemisphere of the Earth. Geographically, it is connected to the continent of Europe. Some of the islands that belong to the Asian continent are located in the Southern hemisphere. (Fig.1.1)

The Asian continent is bounded by,

² The Arctic ocean on the North

² The Pacific ocean on the East

² The Indian ocean on the South and,

² The continent of Europe on the West.

In a geographical view, the Continent of Europe and Asia are both located as one landmass called Eurasia. Ural Mountain Range, River Ural, Caspian Sea, Caucasus Mountains, Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Suez Canal and Red Sea are the boundaries that separate Asia from Europe and Africa.

There are many islands that belong to the Asian continent. Japanese islands, Indonesian islands, Philippine islands, Sri Lanka and Taiwan are examples for those islands which are larger in extent. Andaman Islands, Nicobar Islands and the Maldives are examples of smaller islands.

Fig 1.1 - Geographical location of Asia

3For free distribution

Absolute Location

The location of any place or region on the Earth can definitely be shown using geographical coordinates. Accordingly, the absolute location of the Asian region can be shown on the basis of longitudes and latitudes as follows;

The Asian continent is located between 100 Latitude Southto 800 Latitude North and between 250 and 1800 LongitudesEast.

Uniqueness of the Asian region

There are many specific physical and human characteristics in the Asian region.

²The largest continent in the world

²Presence of all the climatic types of the world

²Presence of different human races, ethnic groups and languages and cultural diversity

²Birth place of many major religions

²Location of the largest mountain ranges and the highest mountain peak

²The most popular continent

Several unique physical and human characteristics

The Asian continent covers an area of 44.6 million km2 (44,579,000 km2). It is about 30% of the land area of the earth and 8.7 % of the entire surface of the Earth. Source : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05

The largest mountain range in the world, the Himalayas, is located in the continent of Asia. Mount Everest, the highest peak which is 8848 meters in height is located here. The Dead Sea is also located in the Asian land mass, is below the sea level. Cherrapunji in the state of Meghalaya in India receives the highest rainfall and Gobi desert is considered as the area that receives the lowest rainfall in the world. Both areas are located in the continent of Asia.

4For free distribution

All types of climates that exist in the world can be found here. Therefore, every type of forest in the world also can be found in the continent of Asia. Therefore, biodiversity which means the diversity of plants and animals is greater in this region.According to the size of population, more than half or about 60% of the world population lives in the Asian region. It is notable that China and India, the two most populous countries in the world are located in Asia. Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Japan that belong to the top ten countries with the highest population of the world are also located in the Asian region. Accordingly, six out of 10 most populous countries are located in the continent of Asia.The average density of population of the continent of Asia is 87 per kilometer, but there are some regions in Asia with a high population density of more than 3000 people per kilometer. In the Asian region, there are 54 States or independent countries. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05)The diversity in the culture, ethnicity and race is a special feature of the population of the Asian region. Existence of various languages is another specific characteristic as various ethnic groups are living there. According to ethnologue, that providing information on languages in the world, 297 living languages are available only in China. (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia 2017.02.05) Asian region has become unique as it is the home to the world’s most ancient civilizations such as Mesapothemia, Howang-Ho, and Indus. It is the birth place of major religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Christianity. At present, people who follow religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Christianity live in this continent.

1. State the geographical boundaries that would indicate the relative location of the Asian region.

2. Mark those boundaries on an outline map of the world and shade the continent of Asia.

3. Prepare a list of factors that cause for the Asia to be considered as specific region of the world.

4. With reference to a political divisions map of Asia, show the countries that belong to it.

Activities

5For free distribution

Physical landscape in Asia

Relief

The most specific topographic feature in the Asian region is the Mountain Range of Himalaya. This mountain range spreads 2500 kilometers and stretches in a land area of 6.12,000 square kilometers. Due to this large mountain range, India is seen to be separated from Asia and as a result, India is called a sub continent. There are many peaks including Everest located on this mountain range, exceeding 7000 meters in altitude.

Table 1.1 - Highest Peaks in the Himalaya mountain range

Highest peaksHeight in metersEverest8848Kanchenjunga8586Makalu8462Dhaulagiri8167Manaslu8156Nanga parbat8126Annapurna8091Nanda devi7817

Source : https://en.wikipedia.org/The other large mountain ranges located in Asia are Altai, Kunlun, Karakorum, Tangshan, Ghats, Sargros and Urals.

Several large plateaus in the world are also located in Asia. Some of them are Tibet, Pamir, Deccan, Central Siberian and Iran plateaus. Tibet plateau is the one that located at the highest elevation in the world. It is located at 5000 meters of altitude and surrounded by the mountain ranges like Himalayas, Karakoram and Pamir. As it is the highest plateau in the world and spread over a very large land area, it is called 'Rooftop of the world'.

Fig 1.2 - Mount Everest - The highest peak in

Himalaya mountain range

6For free distribution

North Asia is a large plain. It is known as the Western Siberian Plain. Manchurian plain and the Great Chinese plain are the other large plains located in Asia. Apart from that, large plains are located close to the river valleys of Indus, Ganges and Hwang Ho.

Drainage

The large number of river systems scattered all over the Asian region is the major characteristic of the drainage. These rivers flow into different oceans and seas.

² Ob, Yenisey and Lena to the Arctic Ocean,

² Amur, Hwang Ho and Yangtze to the Pacific Ocean,

² Ganges, Indus, Brahmaputra, Mekong, Irrawaddy and Salvin to the IndianOcean,

² Euphrates and Tigris flow into the Persian bay.

There are several rivers flowing in to the internal seas.

² Serdaria and Amudaria to the Aral sea,

² Ural flows into the Caspian Sea.

Fig 1.4 - River Ganges - India Fig 1.3 - River Hwang Ho (Yellow River) China

7For free distribution

Map 1.1 - Physical landscape in Asia Source : Gunasena Phyliphs World Map book 2016

8For free distribution

Table 1.2 - Major rivers in Asia

RiverLength (km)

Yangtze6301Hwang Ho5464Mekong4909Lena4400Yenisei4088Ob3650Indus2900Brahmaputra2897Ganges2510

Compare the length of the rivers in Asia with the length and width of Sri Lanka.

There are several large lakes located in Asia. Among them Baikal and Balkhash are major lakes. Lake Baikal is considered as the deepest lake with fresh water located in the world.

1. Mention four major mountain ranges located in the Asian continent.

2. Name five peaks with their height located on the Himalaya mountain range.

3. Write down the largest rivers located in Asia and write the oceans or seas into which they flow.

4. Name two large plateaus, one plain and two lakes located in the Asian continent.

Activities

Assignment

Mark and name all the physical features written above in an outline map of Asia.

Map 1.2 - Size of Sri Lanka

9For free distribution

Climate

The Earth is divided into three main climatic zones according to the variations of the distribution of temperature towards the South Pole and towards the North Pole from the equator. ² Tropical zone (Warm climate) ² Temperate zone (Mild climate) ² Frigid zone (Cold climate) (Refer to the Map 1.3)The Asian continent spreads over to the North Pole from the equator. Therefore, all types of climate that belong to those three climatic zones are found there. ² Tropical zone (Warm climate)Very high temperature prevails throughout the whole year. The average temperature is more than 180C. Therefore, a warm climatic condition prevails here. ² Temperate zone (Mild climate)The average temperature in this zone is lower than the tropical zone. Seasonal variations exist here due to the increase and decrease of temperature from time to time throughout the whole year. A clear warm season and cold season is seen here. ² Frigid zone (Cold climate)The main feature that can be seen here is the falling snow and land being covered with snow for a longer period of the year due to the lower level of temperature.

Map 1.3 - Distribution of the main climatic zones in Asia

Arctic Circle N. 66.5o

Antarctic Circle S. 66.5o

Tropic of Cancer N. 23.5 o

Tropic of Capricorn S. 23.5o

Temperate zone

Temperate zone

Tropical Zone

Tropical Zone

Frigid Zone

Equator 0o

N

10For free distribution

In these three climatic zones, several types of sub climates with different features are be seen due to the influence of various factors, such as changes of the rainfall, influence of monsoons and oceans, altitude, location of mountain rangesand continents.

These types of climates and the areas they are distributed are included in the table below;

The types of climate that exist in the Asian continent

Climatic zoneClimatic typeDistribution Areas/countries

Tropical

Tropical rainy climateJava and Sumatra islands

Tropical monsoon climateIndia, Sri Lanka, Myanmar

Tropical savanna climate North and northeast India, BangladeshWarm desert climateIndia, Thar Desert, MiddleEst CountriesTemperateWarm temperate climateAreas surrounding the Mediterranean SeaWet temperate climateEast China, Japanese islands

FrigidPolar and Tundra climate Siberian region and the Northern parts of Asia

Mountain climateRegions surrounding the mountain range of the Himalaya

Existence of places with very extreme climatic conditions in Asia is a special characteristic² The lowest temperature in Asia is recorded from the small city of Verkhoyansk located in Russia and its temperature decreases up to -500C during certain days.

² The highest temperature in Asia is recorded from Jacobabad in Pakistan and it is about 550C.

11For free distribution

Natural vegetation and wild life

Natural vegetation changes regionally according to the differences of rainfall and temperature. Accordingly, the natural vegetation and the wild life have adapted to the climatic type.

Tropical zone –Tropical Rain Forests

Tropical evergreen forests can be seen in the areas where high temperature and heavy rainfall is experienced throughout the whole year. In these forests, there are various tall trees like Mahogany, Ebony, Rosewood, Kaluwara, Bamboo, Sandalwood, Akeshia are available. The forests consist of different layers. Various types of creepers, moss, lichen as well as epiphytes grow abundantly here. There is also great bio-diversity.

Species of monkeys, reptiles, snakes, fish species and chameleon species are abundantly seen here. Animal species such as tiger, leopard, pig, jackal, deer, and sambar live in large numbers in these areas.

Figure 1.5 - Tropical rain forests and the wild life

12For free distribution

Temperate zone - Temperate Deciduous Forests

Deciduous Forests are grown in the temperate zone as a result of the existence of cold and warm seasons during the year. A special characteristic in these forests is falling of leaves from trees annually. Oak, Mulberry, Chestnut, Pine, Eucalyptus, Douglas fir are specific trees grown in these forests. Kinds of animals living here are Wolf, Bear, Sambar deer, and Antelope.

Frigid zone - Coniferous forests

The specific characteristic of this climatic zone with Taiga and Tundra climate is the prevalence of a longer cold season. Coniferous forests are situated in this region. The trees are in a shape of a cone so as to resist snowfall. Leaves are in a shape of needles. The species of trees grown here are pine, spruce, fir, oak and larch.

Reindeer, Polar bear, Snow fox, Snow dog, Sable, and Mink are animal species that can be seen here.

Fig 1.6 - Temperate zone forests and animal species

13For free distribution

Fig. 1.7 - Frigid zone forests and animal species

1. Table three major climatic zones that are seen in the continent of Asia and the types of climate in each of the climatic zones.

2. Write down the types of natural vegetation spread out in each of the climatic zones.

3. Name the animal and plant species grown in each of the natural vegetation zones you mentioned above.

Activities

Human landscape of the Asian region

Ancient human civilizations

Several ancient civilizations had been established close to river valleys in the world according to the information found at present about human history. Among them, Euphrates and Tigris, Hwang Ho, Indus and Nile river valley civilizations are major ones. It is special that except Nile river valley civilization, all the other three are located in the continent of Asia.

14For free distribution

River Indus flows across present Pakistan and India and falls into the Arabian Sea close to the city of Karachchi. A developed urban civilization established on the basis of the two ancient cities of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa close to this river valley.

A developed civilization emerged centralizing Anyang city in the river valley of Hwang Ho or Yellow river that flows across China.

The Mesopotamian civilization is the other river valley civilization that was located in the continent of Asia. There are evidences that this civilization had been established between the doab of two rivers, of Euphrates and Tigris that flow across present Iraq.

Systematic town planning, buildings, creation of monuments, agriculture and production of artistic items were specific features that developed in these civilizations.

Types of human races

In the Asian region, different human races as well as many ethnic groups live according to various climatic conditions. Mainly, two types of human races live in the Asian region and the countries where they live are mentioned below;

Mongoloid Caucasoid

² China

² Japan

² Malaysia

² Korea

² Singapore

² India

² Afghanistan

² Pakistan

² Sri Lanka

² Arabian countries

15For free distribution

Population distribution

The present population in Asia is 4.46 billion (4460 million) (world populationview.com/continents/asia-population 2017.02.01) Out of this, more than half is distributed in China and India.

This population is unevenly distributed among countries and it varies from region to region. Physical factors have impacted this unequal distribution of population. Relief features, climate, drainage and soil are such physical factors.

When considering the population in Asia, a higher population density can be found close to the river valleys in South, Southeast and East Asian countries. (Over 500 per km2)

² Indo-Gangatic plain in North India.

² Irrawaddy river valley in Myanmar.

² Hwang Ho river valley in China are given as examples.

Central Asia, Mongolia, Northern flat lands Gobi and Thar deserts are sparsely populated areas in Asia.(1.4 map)

Source : worldpopulationreview.com/continents/asia-population - 2017.02.01

²China 1370 millions

²India 1299 millions

²Indonesia 255 millions

²Pakistan 192 millions

²Bangladesh 159 millions

²Japan 127 millions

²Philippine 103 millions

²Vietnam 92 millions

²Iran 79 millions

²Turkey 78 millions

²Maldives 345000

²Brunei 421000

²Macao 641000

²Bhutan 760000

²Timor 1.24 millions

²Bahrain 1.78 millions

²Qatar 2.11 millions

²Armenia 3 millions

²Mongolia 3.02 millions

²Georgia 3.73 millions

Ten countries with a higher density of po pulation by 2017 Ten countries with low population by 2017

16For free distribution

Map 1.4 - Population distribution in Asia

Population Densitypopulation per 1 km2

TokyoBeijing

Bangkok

Jakarta

Mumbai

Indian Ocean

Pacific Ocean

Tehran

over 500

100-500

25-100

10-25

1-10

less than 1

1. State four factors that influenced the unequal distribution of population in Asia.

2. Name five high populated countries, five less populated countries and five high populated cities located in Asia.

3. Mark the five high populated countries and cities located in Asia you stated above in a world map.

Activities

Economic activities

Various economic activities can be found in the countries located in the Asian region. In this region, economy of the countries is based on agriculture, industry and service.

17For free distribution

Here, the attention is paid to three countries which are significant for each of the sectors. ² Agriculture - Pakistan ² Industries - Japan ² Service activities - Dubai

Pakistan as an agricultural country in Asia

Agriculture is the main economic activity in Pakistan. 25.9% of the Gross Domestic Product in Pakistan is contributed from the agricultural sector. Out of the total labour force, 43% is engaged in agricultural activities. 25% of the land area of the country has been used for agricultural activities.

Pakistan is important as a major country in the world that provides raw cotton. Among the other agricultural products in Pakistan, wheat, rice, sugarcane, mangoes, chick pea, vegetables, milk and dairy products, beef, mutton and eggs are important.

Pakistan is also important as a country with the largest irrigation systems in the world. Water is provided for about 16 millions hectares in the country through the Indus river valley irrigation system.

Figure 1.8 - Agricultural activities in Pakistan

18For free distribution

There are two main agricultural seasons in Pakistan and they are known as Khariff and Rabi.

According to the ranking system of the World Food and Agriculture Organization, Pakistan has achieved following places as a food producer to the world market.

Table 1.4 - Place achieved by Pakistan in providing Agricultural Products to the world Market

Type of the productPlace in the world market

Chick pea3

Apricot6

Cotton4Sugarcane5Rice4Mango 4

Source - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agriculture_in_Pakistan//Rankings 21/2/2017

Type of the productPlace in the world market

Dairy products 5

Date palm 5

Onion 7wheat 7Types of oranges 6

Accordingly, Pakistan has earned a significant place as an exporter of agricultural products in the world.

Japan as an industrial country

Japan is a major industrial country in Asia as well as in the world. According to the Per capita Gross National Product, Japan is the country that possess the third largest economy in the world. In Japan, 27.5% of the Gross National Product is contributed by the industrial sector. Out of the labour force, 25.2% is engaged in the industrial sector. A specific feature in Japan is maintaining industries on the basis of the import of mineral resources and raw materials completely.

Among the manufacturing industries in Japan, manufacturing automobiles, electronic equipment, machinery, iron and steel, ship-building, chemicals, textiles, computer and computer accessories, robotics technology, pharmaceuticals and processed foods are important.

Crop seasonDurationCrops grown

KhariffFrom April to Octobercotton, paddy, millet, maize and sugarcane

RabiFrom November to Marchwheat, barley and oats

Table 1.3 - Two crop seasons, duration and the crops grown in Pakistan

19For free distribution

Manufacturing automobiles is the key field of industry in Japan. Japan has won the sixth place out of the top ten largest automobile manufacturers in the world. Japanese automobiles are in the forefront in the world due to factors of high quality, durability, fuel economy, comfort and inclusion of very modern components and equipment. There are several major automobile manufacturing companies in Japan and some foremost ones are mentioned below.

² Toyota

² Mitsubishi

² Nissan

² Honda

² Suzuki

² Isuzu

² Mazda

² Subaru ² Daihatsu

² Hino

Honda, Yamaha, Suzuki and Kawasaki are major motor cycle producting companies in Japan in the world. Japan has achieved a rapid development in producing various types of electronic and electrical equipment. For these productions, the companies of Sony,

Mitsubishi, Electric, Panasonic, Cannon, Fujitsu, Nikon, Yamaha, Sharp, Nec, Hitachi and Casio are important.

Production of plastic, polystyrene and polypropylene are significant as main petro chemical industries in Japan. The other frontline production industry of Japan is producing computers and computer accessories. Among these companies Nec, Fjitzu, Epson and I.B.M are significant.

Fig.1.9 - Industrial activities in Japan

20For free distribution

0

For free di t ib ti

Japan has achieved its development with regard to Gene Technology which is considered a very important field at present in the world. Gene Technology is used in various sections such as agriculture, livestock farming, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and food processing.

Japan is in the forefront among the countries where that utilizes nuclear power in abundance, in the world.

Dubai as a service center

The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven states known as Emirates. Out of them Dubai is a small Emirate state.

The total population of Dubai is 2,502,715 and the population density is 644.2 per km2. Accordingly, Dubai is a highly populated country. Dubai known as global city is important as the business hub of middle east.

The base of the economy of Dubai is the production of mineral oil. The large amount of wealth earned from this resource has been invested in other fields in that country. Dubai has been developed as a service center as its physical environment is not suitable for agricultural purposes.

Among major economic sectors in Dubai, the highest percentage value sector is the service sector. This represents around 37.2% out of the total Gross Domestic Product in Dubai. Out of the total employees, 33.0% is engaged in employment related to the service sector. (Emirates NDB Research-Dubai’s service sector overview-18 March 2015)

There are many service industries carried out by Dubai as a service center;

²An aviation center of modern crossroads connecting East and West. Accordingly, Dubai is important as an intermediate transit center in the world.

²Importance of Port Jabil Ali as the major Middle Eastern export center as well as free trade harbour.

²Center for Tourist attractions and tourist services providing center.

²As a center of providing international communication services Eg – CNN, Al Jazeera

21For free distribution

²As a center that provides an indoor stadium and day and night cricket stadium for cricket and tennis at international level.

²Establishment of the largest trade center called Dubai Mall.

1. State four factors why Pakistan is important as a major agricultural country in Asia.

2. Write down the two main agricultural seasons in Pakistan and write the types of crops grown in each of the season.

3. State five major agricultural export products in Pakistan

4. State four reasons to show how Japan has become a major industrial country in Asia.

5. State the major industrial products in Japan

6. State which reasons have influenced the importance of Dubai as a service center in Asia.

Activities

References

²History, Grade 6 (1996), Educational Publications Department ²Geography, Grade 10 (2011), Educational Publications Department ²Physical Geography, G.C.E. (A/L) (2015), Educational Publications Department ²Geography Information Magazine (1996 - January 6 Volume) Sri Lanka ²Geographists Association ²Gunasena - Phyliphs World map book (2006), M.D. Gunasena and company, Colombo ²https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asia// ²http://www.worldatlas.com ²http://www.worldpopulationreview.com

22For free distribution

Glossary

• Relative location -- idfmalaI msysàu- \õº¦ Aø©Âh®

• Absolute location- ksrfmalaI msysàu- uÛ Aø©Âh®

• Geographical coordinates- N+f.da,Sh LKavdxl- ¦Â°¯À BmTÖ

• Bio diversity- ffcj úúO;ajh- E°º¨£ÀÁøPø©

• Population density- ck >k;ajh- -\ÚöuõøP Ahºzv

• Tropical zone- ksj¾;k l,dmh- -A¯ÚÁ»¯®

• Temperate zone- fi!uH l,dmh- CøhöÁ¨£ Á»¯®

• Polar zone- O%ej l,dmh- -•øÚÄ Á»¯®

• Tropical rainy climate- ksj¾;k j¾Id foaY.=Kh - A¯Ú ©øÇU Põ»{ø»

• Tropical monsoon climate- ksj¾;k fudaiï foaY.=Kh -- A¯Ú £¸ÁUPõØÖ Põ»{ø»

• Tropical savanna climate- ksj¾;k iejkd foaY.=Kh - A¯Ú \ÁßÚõ Põ»{ø»

• Hot desert climate- WIaK ldka;dr foaY.=Kh- -öÁ¨£¨ £õø»ÁÚ Põ»{ø»• Warm temperate climate- WKqiqï fi!uH foaY.=Kh - -CÍg`hõÚ CøhöÁ¨£ Põ»{ø»• Wet temperate climate- f;;a fi!uH foaY.=Kh - -CøhöÁ¨£ DµU Põ»{ø»• Polar and tundra climate- O%ej yd ;=kaød foaY.=Kh- -•øÚÄ ©ØÖ® x¢vµõ Põ»{ø» • Highland climate- Wiaìï foaY.=Kh- E¯º{»U Põ»{ø»

• Tropical rain forests- ksj¾;k j¾Id jkdka;r - A¯Ú ©øÇU PõkPÒ

• Deciduous forestes- m;kYS, jkdka;r - -Cø»²vº PõkPÒ

• Coniferous forests- fla;=Or jkdka;r - F]°ø»U PõkPÒ ö£Ø÷ÓõÀ Cµ\õ¯Ú• Petro chemical industry- fmfg%d ridhk l¾udka;- øPzöuõÈÀ ö©õzu EÒ|õmk• Gross Domestic Product- o< foaYSh ksIamdÈ;h - EØ£zv

• Tourist attractions- ixpdrl wdl¾IK- _ØÖ»õ PÁºa]PÒ

2

Landscape of

Sri Lanka

Relief, drainage, climate and natural vegetation are the

main components of the physical landscape. The human landscape is created by man through his activities on the

basis of this physical background. The main objective of this chapter is to study the inter-relation between physical

and human landscapes of Sri Lanka.

24

For free distribution

Physical Landscape

Sri Lanka is an island with a beautiful landscape located in the Indian Ocean. The island consists of mountains, plains, rivers, waterfalls, beaches and various types of vegetation as well as buildings, roads, tanks, industries and croplands built by man on this physical environment.

Relief

The land of Sri Lanka consists of complex physical features as a result of geo-activities that occurred during a long period in the geo history. Among them, a salient feature is the central mountains located in the center of the country and the plain that extends towards the coastal belt from there. The island can be divided into three zones on the basis of relief. Identify it by studying Map 2.1

Point Pedro

Jaffna

Mannar

Intermediate plain

Central hills

AnuradhapuraMihintale

Ritigala

Yapahuwa

Knuckles

PidurutalagalaNamunukula

Kataragama

Welimada Plateau

Horton Plains KirigalpottaSamanala Kanda(Adams Peak)

GinigathenaColombo

Dondra Head

GalagedaraKandy Plateau

Dimbulagala Batticaloa

Trincomalee

C

o

a

s

t

al

pl

ai

n

N

Map 2.1 - Relief map of Sri Lanka

2

1

3

Coastal plain Up to 30 m from the sea level

1

Intermediate plain From 30 m to 300 m

2

Central mountains Over 300 m

3

25For free distribution

Coastal Plain

The region from sea level up to the 30m contour line along the coast belongs to the coastal plain. In the South in certain places, the coastal plain is about 3 km narrow and in the North it is about 32 km wide. The coastal plain consists of various relief features. The lower areas of river valleys and the river mouth regions belong to this. The coastal plain has several special features such as flat land, points, lagoons, sand dunes as well as the features like braided rivers, marshy lands and deltas.

Fig 2.1 - Coastal plain

Marshes - Marshes are formed when the sediments brought by rivers are deposited as sand banks and blocking the estuaries or water remaining in lowlands due to overflowing of rivers. Examples of marshes are Muthurajawela, Bundala, Kalametiya, Somawathiya, Anawilundawa and Kirala kele.

Bays - A bay has a wider opening of the sea protruding towards the land filled with saline water. Many such bays are located along side the coastal line in Sri Lanka. Some of them are Koddiyar Bay, Arugam Bay and Weligama Bay.

26

For free distribution

Lagoons - A lagoon is a lengthy stretch of an area filled with brackish water, separated from the sea by sand bars which have narrow outlets to the sea only during a certain period of the year. Negombo, Jaffna, Puttlam, Chillaw and Batticaloa are examples.

Points or Headlands - A land area with hard stone that protrudes towards sea is called a point. Dondra head, Fowl Point, Sangamankanda Point and Point Pedro are examples.

Islands - Small land areas completely covered with water are called islands.

Sea Cliffs - A sea cliff is a land area composed of hard rocks standing at an edge of the coast with a steep slope. Trincomallee, Kirinda and Rumassala are examples.

Delta - Delta is a land area formed with the deposit of sediments carried by a river close to river mouths with a shape of a triangle. Deltas can be seen close to the river mouths of Mahaweli Ganga, Mee oya and Kala oya.

There are attractive places located close to the coastal line. Blow hole is such a feature. This name has been given as a result of splashing water up through a cave making a sound.

Intermediate plain

The intermediate plain is 30-300 m in altitude. According to the Map 2.1, the plain is wider in the North and becomes narrower towards the South. The features that can be mostly seen are contour hedges, residual hills, rivers, flood plains and plains.

Fig 2.2 - Blow hole at Kudawella

27For free distribution

Parallel mountains

Residual hills

Rakwana Mountains and Bulutota hills that extend North - West to South - East directions

Residual hills are the remains of hard mountains which had been subjected to erosion. Kataragama, Mihintale, Sigiriya, Ritigala and Govindahela are examples.

There are many rivers flowing across the intermediate plain. Specific features located in between them are plains, flood plains and undulated lands.

Central Hills

The areas over 300 m belong to this zone. This is indicated in No. 3 of Map 2.2. This region is more complex than the other two relief zones.

Map 2.2 – The Central Hills

21

3

4

28

For free distribution

There are four principal mountain ranges in the Central Hills with higher peaks;

1. Samanala Mountain Range

2. Namunukula Mountain Range

3. Pidurutalagal Kirigalpotta Mountain Range

4. Knuckles Mountain Range (Map 2.2)

Plateaus - A plateau is an area of flat land at a high elevation. There are five Plateaus in the Central Hills. (Map 2.2)

²Kandy Plateau

²Hatton Plateau

²Welimada Plateau

²Mahawelatenna Plateau

²Koslanda Plateau

Gaps or Passes - A pass is a low area located between two mountains. Haputale, Balana, Galagedara and Ginigathhena are examples.

Waterfalls - The plateaus which are located in the central hills are of different heights and rivers flow across steep slopes or escarpments forming waterfalls. Bambarakanda, Dunhinda, Luxapana, Diyaluma and Ramboda are examples.

Drainage

Sri Lanka which is rich in water resources contains main 103 river valleys. Out of them, 34 rivers starting from hill country, flow in different directions in an aerial pattern. These rivers are known as permanent rivers since they are abundant with water through out the year. Some rivers that are starting from undulated lands in dry zone, flow during rainy season and become dry during dry season. These are known as seasonal rivers.

Details of a few major rivers in Sri Lanka are stated in Map 2.3 and Table 2.1

29For free distribution

Map 2.3 - A few main rivers of Sri Lanka

N

30

For free distribution

Table 2.1 – Details of a few major rivers in Sri Lanka

River Length km Catchment area (km2)1. Mahaweli Ganga

2. Malwatu Oya

3. Kala Oya

4. Kelani Ganga

5. Yan Oya

6. Deduru Oya

7. Walawe Ganga

8. Kalu Ganga

335

164

148

145

142

142

138

129

10,327

3246

2772

2278

1520

2616

2442

2688

80% of the rivers located in Sri Lanka flow across the dry zone. Mahaweli is the longest river as well and has the largest river basin. Out of the total land area in Sri Lanka 1/6 belongs to this.

When we consider the total drainage pattern, Sri Lanka has a radial pattern. However, various drainage patterns are formed when tributaries are added to main rivers. Among them, Dendritic and Trellis drainage patterns are important. When we compare River Mahaweli with kalu Ganga, Kelani Ganga and Gin Ganga, they flow through a shorter area and the catchment area is also smaller. During the rainy seasons floods occur in abundance close to these rivers.

Activities

1. Mention the difference between relief and landscape.

I' Complete the following table in association with the characteristics and examples of main relief zones in Sri Lanka.

Coastal planIntermediate plain Central mountains

1234

1234

1234

31For free distribution

II' Mark the following in a model of Sri Lanka map

² Jaffna lagoon

² Ritigala

² Dondra head

² Point Pedro

² Mannar islands

² Delft

² Knuckles mountain range

² Sigiriya

² Katharagama mountain

² Govinda hela

² Batticaloa

² Puttalam lagoon

² Mahaweli river

² Kelani river

² Malwathu oya

² Walawe river

² Menik river

² Piduruthalagala mountain

Climate

Sri Lanka is an island located close to the equator. Specific characteristic of the climate in Sri Lanka is the high temperature and the rainfall distributed throughout the year.

Weather is the state of atmosphere that prevails within a short period of time at any place.

Climate of a particular place is the general condition of the atmosphere which is determined by analysing and concluding on weather for a long time.

32

For free distribution

Temperature

Average annual temperature in Sri Lanka is 270C. Yet there are small regional variations. Map 2.4 clearly shows this.

Map 2.4 - Distribution of Annual Temperature of Sri Lanka

33For free distribution

Several factors influence the variation of temperature in Sri Lanka.

² Proximity to the Indian subcontinent

² Altitude (height of land)

² Distance from the sea

² Changing wind pattern

According to the Map 2.4, the Northern part of Sri Lanka has a high temperature while Eastern, Southern and South-Western low lands experience low temperature. The reason for high temperature in the Northern part of Sri Lanka is its proximity to the Indian sub continent. Areas like Jaffna, Anuradhapura and Mannar are subjected to high temperature when temperature increases in India.

When you go to Kandy, Nuwaraeliya or Sri pada you would feel that the temperature is very low in these areas. The reason for this is the decrease of temperature according to altitude. (Table 2.2)

The decrease of the temperature according to altitude is called the lapse rate.

Although Sri Lanka has a high temperature due to its location close to the equator, the temperature decreases as it is surrounded by the ocean. But high temperature prevails in the regions of the interior plains in the country due to the low influence of the ocean.

Seasonal winds also influence the decrease of temperature in Sri Lanka. The temperature becomes balanced according to the seasonal monsoons and cyclones.

Kandy

Nuwaraeliya

Piduruthalagala

Height (m) temperature

447

1882

24.4 0C

15.4 0C

11.5 0C2524

Table 2.2 - Decrease of temperature according to the altitude

34

For free distribution

Rainfall

Rainfall is the total quantity of rain received at a place within a specified period of time.

Map 2.5 indicates the annual rainfall in Sri Lanka. Accordingly, a clear feature shown by this map is the regional change of rainfall. Also it can be clearly seen that there is less rainfall is received in the Northern, Eastern and the South-Eastern parts of Sri Lanka while central mountains receive more rainfall. Sri Lanka receives rain in three ways.

1. Convectional rain

2. Monsoon rain

3. Cyclonic rain

Convectional rain

Since Sri Lanka is

situated close to the equator, convectional process occurs throughout the year. However this process is subdued in certain periods due to the process of

Map 2.5 - Annual rainfall in Sri Lanka

N

35For free distribution

monsoons and cyclones. When monsoons and cyclones are over, convectional process re-appears. According to that, the convectional rain is experience in Sri Lanka prominently during two periods.

1. The first inter monsoon period is between the months of March and April.2. The second inter monsoon period is between the months of October and November

As Sri Lanka is situated close to the equator, it has a high temperature throughout the year. During the months of April and September, the sun is overhead in Sri Lanka and the air near the surface of the earth gets heated and begins to rise. They are called convectional air currents. The air that has risen up, gets cooled and the water vapour is condensed to form clouds and bring rain thereafter. Here, a special feature is that the rainfalls in the evenings. During the morning period a clear sky is visible and more heat is received. In the afternoon, the sky is covered by clouds and it brings rain in the evenings. These are known as convectional rain, thunder showers or evening showers.

Monsoon rain

Monsoon is a specific type of winds that blow during a definite time period of a year across the land. Monsoon means blowing during a particular time period only. Sri Lanka receives monsoon rain during two time periods namely.

1. The South West monsoon (From May to September)

2. The North East monsoon (From December to February)

South West Monsoon rain

The wind that blows across the Indian Ocean towards Sri Lanka from the South West includes much water vapour. When these winds with water vapour reach the Central Hills and rise up, they bring heavy rains to the Western and South Western parts of the country. The Eastern and the Northern areas located in the leeward areas of the central hills do not receive rain from these winds because they blow as dry winds. These dry winds are called ‘kachchan’ in the areas of Batticaloa.

36

For free distribution

Map 2.6 - South-West Monsoon rainfall

North East Monsoon rain

As the North East Monsoon winds blow in the direction of North-East it is called North-East Monsoon. Water vapour carried by these monsoonal winds is very low as they blow across a small water area of the Bay of Bengal from India. Therefore, much rainfall is not received as during South-West Monsoon. More rainfall is received in the North falls in Eastern parts of Sri Lanka.

37For free distribution

Map 2.7 – North East Monsoon rainfall

Cyclones

Cyclones that affect Sri Lanka mostly occur in the area of the Bay of Bengal. Cyclones mostly occur in the months of November and December. But, cyclones may occur at any time of the year. More areas in the North and East receive rainfall from cyclones. These cyclones enter the island from the Eastern coast of Sri Lanka and pass over the South Eastern coast. Whenever there are cyclones a large area throughout Sri Lanka receives rain. Cyclones may occur during the period of monsoonal winds. On such occasions, heavy rainfall is experienced and floods occur. Strength of these winds is introduced as whirlwinds, depressions or storms.

38

For free distribution

Activities

1. Define weather and climate.2. Name three factors that influence the distribution of temperature in Sri Lanka.3. Complete the following table with reference to rainfall in Sri Lanka.

Method of rainfallDurationAreas receiving rainfall

Assignment

Collect pictures and diagrams about disastrous conditions related to rainfall in Sri Lanka and prepare a wall-paper article.

Climatic zones of Sri Lanka

An area where similar climatic features are seen is identified as a climatic zone. According to the factors such as temperature and rainfall, Sri Lanka can be divided into five climatic zones.

1. Low country wet zone

2. Low country dry zone

3. Hill country wet zone

5. Semi-arid zone

4. Hill country dry zone

39For free distribution

Map 2.8 - Climatic zones in Sri Lanka

N

Low country wet zone

² The areas of the South Western flat lands of Sri Lanka belong to this zone.

² The average annual rainfall in this area is 2000 mm.

² The average annual temperature is about 270C.

² Though this area receives rain throughout the year, South West Monsoon period is the main rainy season that prevails from May to September.

40

For free distribution

² The months of February and March are dry to some extent, but there is almost no definite dry season.

Low country dry zone

² The areas of the North and Eastern flat lands of Sri Lanka belong to this zone.

² The average annual rainfall is between 1250 mm-2000 mm.

² Presence of a dry and wet period of time.

² During the period of December to February, this area receives rain from the North-East Monsoon. During this period cyclones too may bring rain.

² During some periods, rain is impermanent. High evaporation prevails.

Hill country wet zone

² The western part of this is formed when a line joining the cities of Matale, Kandy, Nuwaraeliya and Haputale of the Central Hills is drown.

² This area receives rain throughout the year.

² The average annual rainfall is about 3000 mm.

² Maliboda,Watawala and Kenilwerth that receive the highest rainfall in Sri Lanka are located in this zone.

² Dry winds occur from December to February.

Hill country dry zone

² The Eastern part of the hill country belongs to this zone.

² The average annual rainfall is between 1750 mm-2000 mm.

² More rain is received from the North East monsoon, but this area does not receive rain from the South West Monsoon as a result of the location being on the leeward side.

² Dry winds occur during a long period of the year.

41For free distribution

Semi-arid zone

² This area is consisted of Mannar and the surrounding areas located in the North Western part as well as in Hambantota area located in the South Western part of Sri Lanka.

² The average annual rainfall is between 650 mm - 1250 mm.

² Rainfall is less and it is limited to 3 or 4 months.

² Convectional rains are in operation.

² Evaporation is high.

Natural vegetation in Sri Lanka

Trees, plants and creepers that grow without the intervention of man are defined as natural vegetation. The factors that influence the growth of natural vegetation are temperature, rainfall and soil. Vegetation of Sri Lanka is classified mainly on the basis of the factors of temperature and rainfall. Accordingly, there are seven vegetation zones identified in Sri Lanka.

1. Tropical wet forests

2. Dry Mixed Ever Green Forests

3. Intermediate Ever green Forests

4. Hill Country Wet zone Forests

5. Hill Country Dry zone Forests (Patanas)

6. Thorny bushes and scrub lands

7. Mangroves

42

For free distribution

Point Pedro

Elephant Pass

Kilinochchi

Mullativu

Jaffna

Mannar

Vavuniya

Medawachchiya

Anuradhapura

Puttalam

Chilaw

Gamapaha

Hanwella

Ratnapura

Hatton

Nuwara EliyaBadullaMonaragala

Ampara

Batticaloa

Polonnaruwa

Trincomalee

Watawala

Kandy

Matale

Dambulla

Kurunegala

Colombo

Kalutara

Galle

Matara

Hambantota

Map 2.9 - Natural vegetation zones in Sri Lanka

NTropical wet forestsHill country wet zone forestsLow country dry mixed evergreen Mountainous dry zone forests (patanas)Intermediate evergreen forestsThorny and scrub landsMangroves

43For free distribution

Areas distributed / expanded Main treesWestern and South Western parts of Sri Lanka

² Sinharaja

² Hora

² Morapitiya

² Milla

² Kithul

² Kanneliya

² Keena

² Bambarabotuwa

² Midella

² Nedun

² Dediyagala

² Na

² Nakiyadeniya

² Godapara

Features of vegetation

²Height of the trees is between 30-40 meters.

²There are several layers.

²Trees grow throughout the year.

²Colour of the trees is dark green.

²There is a canopy formed at the top and there is no light inside the forest.

²Plants growth is dense.

²Under growth is abundant. There are plenty of creepers, ferns, lichens and orchids here.

²Higher bio diversity.

Tropical wet forests (Wet evergreen forests/ Tropical rain forests)

Figure 2.3 - Tropical wet forests

44

For free distribution

Figure 2.4 - Dry Mixed evergreen forests

Main Areas of DistributionTrees

These forests are distributed throughout the low country dry zone.

² Somawathiya

² Satinwood

² Wasgomuwa

² Teak

² Milla

² Wilpattu

² Ebony

² Flood p lains of r iver Mahaweli ² Yala

² Suriyamara

² Palu

² Maduru oya

² Margosa

² Udawalawa

² Weera

Features of vegetation

² Height of the trees is between 20 m -30 m.

² Trees grow during the rainy season and growth rate is less during the dry season.

² Bushes of 2 m - 3 m in height could be seen.

² They do not grow densely and there are tall trees at intervals.

² The forests are light green in colour and there are hardwood trees.

Dry mixed evergreen forests

45For free distribution

Areas of distributionMain trees

These forests can be seen in the transitional zone that separates the wet zone and dry zone.

² Kurunegala

² Jak

² Sapu² Badulla

² Pihimbiya

² Matale

² Lunumidella

² Tangalle

² Mahogany

Features of vegetation

² These forests have trees that grow in the wet and dry zones as it changes to the dry zone from the wet zone.

² The trees that grow in wet and dry zones are mixed.

² Height of the trees is 10 m - 25 m.

Intermediate Evergreen Forests

Figure 2.5 - Intermediate evergreen forests

46

For free distribution

Areas of Distribution Main trees

They are found in areas over 1200 m in the Western slops of the Central hills.

² Samanalakanda

² Walsapu

² Beraliya

² Hulanheek

² Pidurutalagala

² Keena

² Knuckles

² Mihiriya

² Horton plain

² Dawata

² Mora

Features of the vegetation

² Average height of the trees is 8 m - 10 m.

² With the increase in the altitude, height of the trees gets reduced gradually.

² Trees grow as a canopy. Colourful leaves can be seen.

² Epiphytes and undergrowth are in abundance.

Hill country wet zone forests

Figure 2.6 - Hill country wet zone forests

47For free distribution

Areas of distributionMain trees

They are found in areas over 1400m in the Eastern part of the Central Hills

² Horton plains

² Maharathmal

² Domba² Sandatenna

² Aralu

² Sitaeliya

² Bulu

² Ambewela ² Kandapola

² Nelli

² Kahata

Features of vegetation

² Grasslands are distributed with different types of patanas. (Patana, Talawa, Damana, Villu)

² Isolated trees can be seen here and there.

² Trees have grown so as to resist the winds. The trees are short and they resist the cold and winds. Trees are twisted by nature.

² These forests are called cloud forests. It is because the canopy is seen as clouds when is seen from above.

² Leaves are small and looks folded.

² Trees do not grow well as there is a thin layer of soil.

Hill country dry zone forests

Figure 2.7 - Hill country dry zone forests

48

For free distribution

Areas of Distribution Main trees

These forests are distributed in the North Western and South Eastern parts of Sri Lanka.

² Areas in the Hambantota district.

² Areas in the Mannar district.

² Eraminia

² Cactus

² Palu

Features of vegetation

² Leaves of the trees are thick, scanty and thorny.

² Leaves are small.

It is because they have adapted to the dry climate.

² There are trees that get adapted to resist a long dry period.

Thorny bushes and shrub lands

Figure 2.8 - Thorny bushes and shrub lands

49For free distribution

Areas of DistributionMain plants

Mangroves are found near estuaries and around lagoons in the coastal areas.

² Kirala

² Kadol

² Ginpol

² Diyakanduru

² Katu Ikili

² Wal Anoda

Features of vegetation

² Plants have many roots ; Prop roots and stilt roots

² Roots spread above water. They are known as respiratory roots.

² Those plants have adapted to brackish water

Mangroves

² Kalametiya² Bundala² Muthurajawela² Anavilundawa² Trincomalee

Figure 2.9 - Mangroves

50

For free distribution

According to the facts mentioned above, it is clear that there is a physical diversity in Sri Lanka. Even in a small land, this diversity could be seen in relief, climate, vegetation and drainage. It is because Sri Lanka is a small island.

In Sri Lanka, there is a climatic condition that one can experience from dry climate to cold climate. This scenic beauty can be experienced when one travels from Hambantota to Nuwaraeliya. We are able to see the diversity in climate, drainage and vegetation in a few hours. This physical diversity has contributed to the sustainability of the environment as well as to the constant sustainability of man. Physical diversity of Sri Lanka is a tourist attraction to locals and foreigners.

Assignment

Assignment

Plan an educational trip to identify relief, climate and vegetation in Sri Lanka. Prepare a brochure to include the features such as relief, climate vegetation.Human landscape

Population of Sri Lanka is 20.2 million. It increases every year. Information on population is obtained from the census conducted by the Department of Population and Census once in ten years.

Distribution of population

Population of Sri Lanka has spread unevenly. The Majority of population lives in the wet zone. In comparison, less population is distributed in the dry zone. (Map 2.10) From the total population,

H

uman landscape

Population and human activities are the main factors affecting in creation of human landscape.

Map 2.10 - Distribution of population in Sri Lanka

N

51For free distribution

¼ is accumulated in the Western Province and the least distribution is shown in the Northern Province. The reasons for the increase of population in the vicinity of Colombo are the location of the administrative and the commercial city and the abundance of service facilities such as health, education, transportation and industries in the province. A low population distribution is shown in the districts of Moneragala, Vauniya, Mannar and Mullatiu. The reasons are less physical, infrastructure facilities and unavailability of economic opportunities in these areas. These changes in the population distribution can be shown through the density quantitatively. It is depicted by Map 2.11.

This uneven distribution can be explained according to the districts and provinces. These quantitative changes can be shown though population density. According to the population census 2012, density of population was 323 per square kilometre in Sri Lanka. This does not mean that the population is distributed in every region equally. It is clearly indicated in Map 2.11.

Regional changes of population distribution in several selected districts can be identified according to the population density as shown in table 2.3.

Kilinochchi

Mulaithiv

District Margin

Population

Jaffna

MannarVavuniya

Anuradhapura

Puttalam

Gampaha

Ratnapura

Nuwara EliyaBadulla

Moneragala

Batticaloa

Ampara

Polonnaruwa

Trincomalee

Kandy

Kegalle

MataleKurunegala

Colombo

Kalutara

GalleMatara

Hambantota

Map 2.11 - Population density according to the districts of Sri Lanka

N

52

For free distribution

Composition of Population

Composition of the population in Sri Lanka can be expressed in various ways such as distribution by gender, age, ethnicity and religion.

Distribution by sex

According to the population census 2012, out of the total population, 51.5% are females while 48.5% are males. It is clear from the data that the percentage of the males is gradually decreasing. This can be clearly expressed by sex ratio. The number of males for 100 females in the population is called the sex ratio. The following table indicates how sex ratio has changed according to the census reports of 1981 and 2012.

Table 2.4 - Sex ratio in Sri Lanka

YearSex ratio

1981104.02012 94.3

Source: Reports of the census and statisticsAge structure

According to the age structure in Sri Lanka the aging population has increased to a certain amount. It is expressed in the following table. Table 2.5 - Population according to age structure

Age Census % (1981)Census % (2012)Below 14 years

Between 15-59 years

Above 60 years

35.2

58.2

06.6

25.3

62.3

12.4

Source : Reports of the census and statistics

DistrictPopulation densityColombo3305 km2

Gampaha1541 km2

Kandy664 km2

Hambantota210 km2

Moneragala72 km2

Table 2.3 - Population Density in a few

districts of Sri Lanka

53For free distribution

Population structure according to the race

According to the races, ethnic structure is shown as given below;

Table 2.6 - Population structure according race Graph 2.1 - Population structure according race RacePercentage (2012)Sinhalese74.9

Sri Lankan Tamils11.2

Sri Lankan Muslims9.2

Indian Tamils4.3

Others0.5

Sinhalese

Sri Lankan TamilsIndian Tamils

Sri Lankan Muslims

Others74.9

11.2

4.29.2

0.5

Population structure according to the religion

Population structure according to the religion is given below;

Buddhist

Hindu

Hindu

Islam

Roman catholic

ChristianityOthers70.212.6

9.7

6.1

1.30.1

Table 2.7 - Population structure according to the religionGraph 2.2 - Population structure according to the religion

ReligionPercentage (2012)Buddhist70.2Hindu12.6Islam 9.7Roman catholic 6.1Christianity 1.3Others 0.1

Growth of population

The difference between the crude birth rate and the crude death rate is called the natural growth of population in a particular country. When it is added to the net migration (the difference between in and out migration of the country) it is called the growth of the total population. Graph 2.3 indicates how the population increased in Sri Lanka from 1871 to 2012.

54

For free distribution

Graph 2.3 - Growth of population 1871 - 2012

Settlements

Settlements are established by groups of people to live together with co-operation to be protected from enemies and wild animals and to avoid a harsh environment.

A settlement cannot be considered a mere habitat only. Settlement is a unit which consists of various institutions of economic, social and cultural activities of man and religious places, buildings, gardens, agricultural lands as well as infrastructure facilities.

Settlements can mainly be categorized into three groups.

²Urban settlements

²Rurban settlements

²Rural settlements

Rural settlements

The settlements which are based on agriculture and fisheries industry, paying more attention on primary economic activities when using resources, are called rural settlements. The villages located close to tanks in the dry zone and fishing villages are examples.

55For free distribution

Fig 2.10 - A few rural settlements

Urban settlements

Urban settlements are areas with higher density of population concentrated in a limited land area, centred on non agricultural activities. Colombo, Gampaha, Kandy, Jaffna and Matara are examples.

Rurban settlements

The settlements which have both rural and urban features are called rurban settlements. In these areas, rural features disappear and Urban features are being emerged. Urban areas of cities can be cited as examples.

Activities

1. Name the two districts that have the highest and the least population density in Sri Lanka.

2. Mention 4 reasons as to what the increment in population in Western province.

3. What are the reasons for the increment of elderly population in Sri Lanka.

4. Mention in short what a settlement is.

Fig.2.11 - Urban settlements

Fig. 2.12 - Rurban settlements

56

For free distribution

Economic Activities

Economic activities of Sri Lanka can be divided mainly into three sections. ² Agricultural sector

² Industrial sector

² Service sector

Agricultural sector

There are various agricultural activities seen in Sri Lanka. Examples are paddy cultivation, gardening and chena cultivation in the dry zone and also tea, coconut, paddy, rubber and vegetables are cultivated in the wet zone while tea is cultivated in mountainous areas. Fisheries industry and livestock farming too belong to the agricultural sector. For example, fishing industry is carried out in the coastal areas and in inland reservoirs. Livestock farming is done in the areas of Ambewela, Pattipola, Polonnaruwa and Hambantota.

Industrial sector

Most of the industries in Sri Lanka are located in the Western Province. There are various types of industries. Among such, main industries are assembling industries, plastic, tyre, textiles, confectionery and handicrafts. The government has also established Industrial Zones in Sitawaka, Polonnaruwa, Ratmalana and Minuwangoda and Free Trade Zones in Biyagama, Katunayaka and Koggala.

Agricultural sector

Industrial sector

Fig 2.13 - Service sector

57For free distribution

Service sector

Service sector is important for the improvement of living standards of people in a country. Service sector includes various services such as education, health, transportation, electricity, water supplies, security, sanitary and communications. Contribution of the service sector is increasing with reference to employment in Sri Lanka. Service facilities are mostly expanded in urban areas.

Infrastructure facilities

During the recent times, special attention has been focused to develop the infrastructure facilities to promote the living standards facilities of people. Among them, building roads, providing electricity and water are major.

When developing infrastructure facilities, a prominent place has been given to the road development and transportation. This field is developing at a rate between 5% - 6% annually. The road system has spread in every region so that there are facilities for anyone to reach any place in the country within a day. In urban areas, although the road system is developed, the congestion is still there. Recent governments have taken various steps to develop the field of road transportation like;

²Widening roads

²Building roads in the rural sector

Fig 2.14 - An express way in Sri Lanka

²Building fly-overs

²Building express ways

58

For free distribution

Electricity

Almost all the regions in Sri Lanka have been provided with electricity facilities. Electricity is generated from the electricity projects constructed, in association with the major rivers of Mahaweli, Kalu, Kelani and Walawe. Hydro electricity and thermal power are major ways of providing electricity in Sri Lanka. In addition, the use of regenerative energy sources like solar power is increasing.

Water

Sri Lanka is a country rich with the water resource. Water sources like rivers, streams, wells, ponds, tap water and ground water are used to fulfil the needs of water of the people. Water taken from these sources is used for different simple purposes like cooking, drinking, sanitary needs and also for complex necessities such as agriculture, industry, and generation of electricity. Economic affairs and living needs of people depend on water.

Water sources which are used to fulfil these needs are getting polluted at present. In urban areas, tap water is important for drinking purposes. Wells, ponds and tanks are important in rural areas in this regard. Importance of water sources has been decided depending on particular areas.

Water and electricity are limited resources not only for us but for many countries in the world. It is our duty and responsibility to get the maximum use of this resource, without wasting to protect it for the future generations.

Activities

1. Mention three main sections of economic activities in Sri Lanka

2. Water and electricity should be used sparingly. State three reasons for this.

59For free distribution

Influence of physical landscape of Sri Lanka on human activities

Physical landscape of Sri Lanka influences human activities decisively. There are regional changes in the physical landscape and accordingly, regional changes too can be seen in the human landscape.

Coastal plain

Fig 2.15 - Coastal landscape

Several human activities in the coastal plain are indicated in figure 2.15. The fisheries industry, coir industry, excavating limestone and the tourist industry have emerged using the physical environment.

60

For free distribution

Activities

1. What are the human activities which are common to the coastal plain indicated by the above diagram?

2. What are the other human activities in the coastal plain which are not shown in the diagram?

3. State the physical facilities available in the coastal plain for human activities mentioned by you.

The wet zone

Fig 2.16 - The wet zone landscape

In the wet zone, there is a suitable physical environment for various human activities. Various types of cultivation, distribution of high population and a developed road system can be seen here. Several human activities which are carried out in the wet zone are indicated in figure 2.16.

61For free distribution

Activities

1. What are the human activities shown by the Fig. 2.16? Form a table to include them.

2. Name several crops grown in this area.

3. State the physical factors necessary that are affected for growing these crops.

4. Name the services and employment that can be seen in abundance in this area.

5. Mention two factors that caused this area to become high populated.

The dry zone

Fig. 2.17 - Dry zone landscape

Tank system is an outstanding feature in the dry zone landscape. The tank system has been constructed according to the relief and is connected the irrigation system. It is a specific feature in this area.

62

For free distribution

Paddy cultivation, chena cultivation, villages established in association with tanks, ancient cities and various types of cultivation too can be seen in the dry zone landscape.

Activities

1. According to Fig. 2.17, what are the human activities that can be seen in the dry zone?

2. What are the major physical factors that influence the development of paddy cultivation in this zone? Hill country landscape

Fig. 2.18 - Hill country landscape

A specific relief and climatic condition exist in the hill country landscape and the human activities have been adjusted accordingly.

63For free distribution

Activities

1. What are the specific human activities in the hill country landscape?

2. State the specific crops grown in this zone.

3. What are the physical factors that influence growing each of the crops?

4. Hill country roads have bends. Why is it?

5. What are the reasons in making roofs with less height and in colour green?

6. What are the factors that influence tourist attractions in the hill country?

7. Why do the people living here use warm clothes?

Jaffna Peninsula

Fig. 2.19 - Jaffna Peninsula

There is a specific landscape in the Jaffna Peninsula in the Northern part of Sri Lanka. In this zone, limestone is in abundance and the climate is arid. The people who live here have developed agriculture using the ground water and the red soil. Several features found in this landscape are indicated in figure 2.19

64

For free distribution

Activities

1. According to the Figure 2.18, what are the human activities found in Jaffna Peninsula?2. What are the methods used by the people in this area to get ground water?3. What are the specific crops cultivated and industries that can be seen in this area?4. There are many islands located in the Jaffna region. What are the human activities that have been established in association with them.

5. Write few products related to Palmyrah tree?

Influence of human activities on the physical landscape of Sri Lanka

In the above lesson, we studied that human activities are determined according to different types of environments. With the increase of population, the uses of physical environment and resources too increase. Accordingly, influences that affect the physical environment too increase. Human activities influence the physical environment in Sri Lanka.

Fig. 2.20 - The influence of human activities on physical landscape of Sri Lanka

65For free distribution

Study the above pictures well and identify several environmental problems related to various landscapes in Sri Lanka.

1. Name a few instances where man uses the physical environment in the areas of the dry zone.

2. What are the impacts that affect man due to loss of habitats of wild animals?

3. Prepare a list of human activities that destroy physical environment in these areas.

Activities

Assignment

1. Prepare a brochure including pictures of human activities that could be identified in various landscapes.

2. Name one environmental problem that prevails in your area and explain how human activities have contributed for causing it.

References

² Jala Asiriya Rekaganeema, 2015, Sarath Amarasiri

² Human Geography I - II, Educational Publications Department

² Sri Lanka Central Bank Annual Reports - 2015

² Sri Lanka National Map Collection, School Edition, Sri Lanka, Servay Department

² Sarasavi School Map book, Sarasavi Publishing, A. Weerathunga

Glossary

• Landscape- N+ o¾Ykh- {»z÷uõØÓ®

• Relief- N+ úIu;dj- uøµz÷uõØÓ®

• Braided river- yevm¨ .x.dj- ¤ßÛ¯ BÖ

• Marsh- j.=re ìu- \x¨¦

66

For free distribution

• Point- ;=vqj- •øÚ• Bay- fndlal- Shõ

• Lagoon- l,mqj- PhÜ÷µ›

• Gap- lfmd,a,- PnÁõ´

• Radial drainage pattern- wÍh c,jyk rgdj- BøµÁiPõÀ £õ[S

• Dendritic drainage pattern- YdÇh c,jyk rgdj- ©µ{Pº ÁiPõÀ £õ[S

• Trellised drainage pattern- cd,dldr c,jyk rgdj- AÔ¯øh¨¦ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S

• Elevation- Wkak;dxYh- uøµ E¯ºa]

• Lapse rate- m;k YS>%;dj- |ÊÄ Ãu®

• Convectional rain- ixjyk j¾Idj- ÷©ØPõÄøP ©øÇ

• Monsoon rain- fudaiï j¾Idj- £¸ÁUPõØÖ ©øÇ

• Cyclone rain- jdiq,s j¾Idj- `ÓõÁÎ ©øÇ

• Condensation- >kSNjkh- Jk[PÀ

• Evergreen forests- iodyß; jkdka;r - GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ Põk

• Mangrove- lfvd,dk- PshÀ

• Population distribution- ck jHdma;sh- -\Úz öuõøP

• Population composition - ck ixhq;sh- \ÚzöuõøP ÷\ºUøP

• Sex ratio- mqñ;sß wkqmd;h- £õÀ Ãu®

• Crude birth rate- o< Wm;a wkqmd;h - ¤Ó¨¦ Ãu®

• Crude death rate- o< urK wkqmd;h - CÓ¨¦ Ãu®

• Rural settlements- .%dóh ckdjdi - Qµõª¯U Si°¸¨¦

• Urban settlements- kd.ßl ckdjdi - |PµU Si°¸¨¦

• Rurban settlements- .eñ kd.ßl ckdjdi- Qµõ©|Pº Si°¸¨¦

• Infrastructure facilities- há;, myiqlï - EmPmhø©¨¦ Á\vPÒ

• Water sources- c, uQ,dY% - }º ‰»õuõµ®

• Environmental Pollution - mßir ¥IKh - `ÇÀ ©õ\øhuÀ

Development is a continuous process. It differs from country to country and from region to region. Different indicators are used to measure development. The main objectives of this chapter are, identifying the indicators and examining the spatial changes of the development in Sri Lanka, based on these indicators.

Spatial Changes of Development in Sri Lanka

3

68

For free distribution

Development

Development is the improvement of the quality of life of people in economic, social and cultural aspects. There are many different definitions of Development. The UNESCO declaration on development is,

1978 - UNESCO Declaration

In a country social development should take place along with economic development. Social development should take place within sectors encompassing food and nutrients, health, education, housing, social security, clothing, leisure and human freedom.

According to this definition, development means, giving a better standard of living to the people of a country with improved economic, social and cultural standards. The definition of Development changes from time to time. Development changes from region to region and from country to country. There are several indicators to reflect these changes.

Indicators used to measure Development

Different countries utilise different indicators to measure Development in the world. The following indicators are important among them,

01.

Per capita income

02.

Infant mortality rate

03.

Life expectancy

at birth

04.

Literacy

Living conditions of people and how it differs from region to region can be made clear using these indicators. Such regional changes can be identified as spatial changes.

Per capita income

The amount of money that is being earned per person in a country in a given period is called per caprita income.

69For free distribution

It is calculated as given below;

Total income of t he country Midyear population Per Capita Income =

Income of the population of the country can be calculated by this indicator. If the per capita income rises in a country, people can have the benefit of good living conditions.

Infant mortality rate

Infant mortality rate is the number of deaths of infants under the age one year per 1000 live births. Infant mortality rate of a country reflects the health and medical facilities and level of nutrition level in a country.

Life expectancy at birth

Life expectancy is the average time a new born is expected to live. The condition of health facilities and their distribution in a country, food and level of nutrition, good health practices, distribution of facilities for sports and leisure of the country can be identified by these indicators.

Literacy

Literacy is the ability of reading and writing of individuals above 15 years of age. This is calculated as a percentage of the whole population over 15 years old.

Number of people above 15 years of age who has ability to read and write

The total population over 15 years old x 100 Literacy =

70

For free distribution

Literacy indicators reflect the distribution of facilities of schools, education and poverty.

Spatial variations in Development in Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka is a developing country but regional differences also can be seen. Let us examine these differences according to each indicator.

Per capita income can be used to understand the uneven distribution of the income of people within Sri Lanka regionally. Monthly per capita income in 2009 in Sri Lanka is about Rs. 36,451. Table 3.1 depicts the regional differences in the country.

Table 3.1 – Per capita income by districts of Sri Lanka - 2009

DistrictMonthly per capita income in Rs.DistrictMonthly per capita income in Rs.

Colombo51,070KilinochchiNo details received

Gampaha48,870Batticaloa22,844

Kalutara35,780Ampara24,721

Kandy33,063Tricomalee24,291

Matale30,013Kurunegala36,922

Nuwara Eliya31,029Puttalam32,918

Galle31,376Anuradhapura37,586

Matara30,980Polonnaruwa31,526

Hambantota 36,879Badulla32,313

Jaffna18,917Monaragala22,161

MannarNo details receivedRatnapura41,312

Vavuniya39,640 Kegalle 29,342

MulatiuNo details receivedSri Lanka 36,451

Source : Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012

It is clear that per capita income differs according to Districts.

71For free distribution

According to World Bank Reports, infant mortality rate was 8.4 in the year 2015. Still there are regional differences in infant mortality rate. The table 3.2 shows the distribution of infant mortality rate according to the districts of Sri Lanka in 2010.

Table 3.2 - Infant Mortality Rate in the Districts of Sri Lanka - 2010

DistrictInfant Mortality Rate - 2010 DistrictInfant Mortality Rate - 2010

Colombo14.1Mulative No details received

Gampaha02.7Batticaloa25.1

Kalutara03.3Ampara04.5

Kandy11.1Tricomalee02.5

Matale07.2Kurunegala09.7

Nuwara Eliya14.8Puttalam07.0

Galle09.9Anuradhapura10.3

Matara09.4Polonnaruwa04.6

Hambantota 04.3Badulla06.2

Jaffna03.0Monaragala03.6

Kilinochchi 00.9Ratnapura05.7

Mannar03.5Kegalle 05.7

Vavuniya08.6

Source : Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012

There are regional differences even in life expectancy. The life expectancy of the whole population of Sri Lanka is about 74.2. This differs according to the gender. Life expectancy of women is 78.6 while it is 72 of males. When considering the life expectance rate of different districts, these changes can be clearly understood.

72

For free distribution

Table 3.3 - Life Expectancy at birth according to the districts of Sri Lanka - 2002DistrictMale FemaleDistrictMale Female

Colombo61.971.9Badulla68.975.4Gampaha71.580.4Kegalle 72.580Kalutara72.780.2KilinochchiNo details receivedNo details receivedKandy67.375Batticaloa66.873.8Matale70.777.5Ampara70.375.9Nuwara Eliya70.874.7Tricomalee68.574.2Galle70.578.4Kurunegala68.978

Matara73.580.4Puttalam69.178.9Hambantota 76.982.3Anuradhapura66.576.1JaffnaNo details receivedNo details receivedPolonnaruwa68.977.6

MannarNo details receivedNo details receivedBadulla75.280.5

VavuniyaNo details receivedNo details receivedMonaragala7278.4

Mulatiu No details receivedNo details receivedRatnapura73.778.7

Source ( Sri Lanka Human Development Report 2012

It is clear that there are differences regionally according to the indicators of literary rate. Although Sri Lanka has a higher literacy rate among South Asian countries, there are changes in according to various districts. (Graph 3.1)

Graph 3.1 - Proportional Literacy Rate Based on Districts - 2002

73For free distribution

Literacy rate differs according to the urban, rural and estate sectors in Sri Lanka.

Urban – 94.7 %

Rural – 91.8%

Estate – 74.3%

By this, It is clear that the proportional literacy rate is high in urban areas where there are more facilities.

1. Explain what Development is.

2. Name four indicators that are used to measure the level of development.

3. Explain briefly how per capita income, infant mortality rate and literacy affect the position of development of a country.

Activities

References

² Human Geography I - II Educational Publications Department

² Annual Report of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka - 2015

² Protection of water Recourse - 2015 Sarath Amarasiri

² Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2012/2013 - Final Report, Department of Census and Statistics

² Sri Lanka Human Development Report - 2012

74

For free distribution

Glossary

• Development indices- ixj¾Ok o¾Yl- A¤Â¸zvU SÔPõmiPÒ

• Per capita income- tAl YS¾I wdodhu- u»õ Á¸©õÚ®

• Infant mortality rate- <ore urK wkqmd;h- ]_©µn Ãu®

• Life expectancy at birth- Wmf;a § wdhq wfmalaIdj - ¤Ó¨¤À B²Ò Gvº£õº¨¦

• Literacy- idlaIr;dj- GÊzuÔÄ A¤Â¸z

v°À Ch®\õº• Spatial variations in development- ixj¾Okfha wjldYSh fjkialï- ©õØÓ®

Environmental Balance4

The objective of this unit is to study the importance of

maintaining the environmental balance, unfavourable

effects of the imbalance of the environment and the way how the environmental ethics pave the path for the

sustainable development.

76

For free distribution

Environmental balance

The surrounding that is created by biotic (living) and abiotic (non-living) components is environment. While plants and animals of this environment belong to the living part, solar energy, air, water, soil, land forms, rocks etc. belong to the non-living part. These living components maintain mutual relationships with the non-living components in the eco system. The environmental balance depends on this relationship.Importance of maintaining the environmental balance

All plants and animals living on the earth are called the bio-community. Maintenance of the environment where bio-community lives, while protecting the environmental attributes by reacting to the changes that naturally occur is environmental balance.Interactions occur between plants and animals. Those living beings maintain relationships with the physical environment. The environmentalists consider man too as an essential component of the environment. Similarly the environmental factors too influence the activities of the living beings; activities of living beings too influence the environment. Maintenance of this mutual balance of influence is important for the existence of living beings.

Factors causing the collapse of environment balance

All living beings (plants and animals) including man get their basic needs fulfilled from the physical environment. The environment is composed of the components which are linked to each other. A change that occurs in one component, causes to changes in the whole environment.

Man utilizes the physical environment in different ways for the following needs;

² To Fulfil the basic needs like food, clothes, costumes and housing

² For transport and communication

² For trade

When population increases, the needs as well as their complexity too increase. Hence due to the use of modern technology and increase of production, man has to go a speedier journey, surpassing the environment.

For free distribution77

During the period when the traditional agriculture was the main economic activity of man, the impact on the environment was minimum. However, after the industrial revolution, the impact of man on environment became acute. The damage caused to the environmental balance due to the expansion of agriculture and industries at a rapid speed along with modern technology was immense. The environmental balance began to collapse due to the excessive addition of waste material to the environment and adverse effect on the components of it. Collapsing of the environmental balance in this manner is termed as environmental imbalance.

Factors that cause environmental imbalance

² Excessive utilization of resources

² Irregular development processes

² Excessive burning of fossil fuel

² Use of agro-chemicals

² Deforestation

² Reclamation of low lands

² Irregular utilization of land

² Employment of improper technology

Figure 5.1 - Factors influencing environmental imbalance

78

For free distribution

It is clear that such processes which are carried out targeting the development of a country have damaged the environmental balance. Though development is essential, it must be achieved while protecting the environmental balance with minimum damage to the environment.

1. State three human activities that cause environmental imbalance.

2. State three problems that have emerged due to such human activities in an area in your District/ Province.

Activities

Unfavorable effects of collapsing of environmental balance

Unfavorable effects that occur due to the collapse of the environmental balance affects the whole environment on the earth. At present, as never before in the human history, the earth’s environment has faced a severe crisis. Scientists and environmentalists have warned that if the present environmental damage continues further, around another 200 years, the earth will convert into a condition which is not conducive for man and other living beings to live.

Figure 5.2 - Unfavourable effects of the collapsing of environmental balance

Human activities are the root cause for most of these environmental problems. All the countries in the world must corporate to find solutions for these problems.

For free distribution79

Human activities that affect the environment

1. Destruction of forests.

²Destruction of flora and fauna

²Destruction of water sources

2.Use of Agro-chemicals.

²Destruction of soil and aquatic life

²Contamination of water

3. Use of fossil fuel for energy.

²Air pollution

²Increase of the environmental temperature

4. Improper urbanization.

²Adding of waste to environment

²Blocking the water ways

5. Improper disposal of waste

²Emergence of environmental health hazards

²Destruction of natural beauty

6. Experimentation of military weapons (armament)

²Atmospheric pollution

²Water pollution in oceans

Assignment

1. Prepare a report on an incident relating to collapsing the balance of the world environment based on the following titles.

² Incident ² Date² Country ² Impact

80

For free distribution

Necessity of environmental ethics

Favorable habits which are necessary to maintain the environment in a desirable manner are called environmental ethics.

Ethics are bound with personal behaviour. They are accorded to the standard rules and regulations, customs and traditions followed by the people in the societies where they live. Man has acted inquisitively since he began to deal with the environment. Then, he used to treat natural environment and natural objects which have created in the conducive surrounding for living with devotion and respect. Man who lived then, received knowledge about the environment as he worked basing on beliefs, faiths and religions. Faiths and beliefs like respecting trees and creepers, protecting them, making offerings and beseeching for the protection of the guardian deities of the forest when entering to the forest are linked to the religious and social life.

Since ancient times, as man considered the environment as essential for survival, he began to worship and protect it.

Likewise, man lived with nature in harmony and protected it. It is important to identify the necessity of environmental ethics as strategies of environmental conservation, in the journey towards sustainable development. If it is necessary to maintain the environmental balance, we must adjust to the strategies mentioned in environmental ethics. Every religion has highlighted the importance of protecting the environment.

Sustainable Development

The development that is conducted fulfilling the present needs while building an environment that ensures the rights of fulfilling the needs of future generations could be termed as sustainable development.

The necessity of having a sustainable development approach in preparing development plans, is of paramount importance. In following such an approach, more attention must be focused on environmental ethics as well. The present day development problems prove that in sustainable development both environment and development must be maintained in collaboration. There, the attention must be focused on the ability of the future generations to fulfil their needs.

For free distribution81

Due to the lack of sufficient attention paid to the environment in present day, when large scale when development projects are done, there is a danger of collapsing the environmental balance.

Different national level as well as international level procedures have been followed to protect the environmental balance.

Under the national conservation plan the following procedures have been followed;

²Planning of land use

²Conservation of wild life and forests

²Promotion of agriculture without damaging the forests, water and soil

²Coastal conservation

²Launching environmental educational programme

²Establishment of the Central Environmental Authority

²Establishment of the Ministry of Environment

Two Acts have been passed to protect the environmental balance in Sri Lanka

²Coastal Conservational Act

²National Heritage Forest Act

Procedures that have been taken at international level

²Ramzar Convention on the conservation of wet lands

²Montreal Convention aiming at the protection of the ozone layer

Under this situation, the concept of sustainable development clarifies the guideline about the factors on which utilization of resources must be based on. Accordingly, while fulfilling the needs of the present generation, the environment must be secured for the needs of the future generations too.

Activities

1. State a few environmental ethics found in different religions.

82

For free distribution

Assignment

Explain how you, as a student of a school can act to minimize the unfavourable effects occur due to the breaking down of environmental balance.

References

² Physical Environment on earth, H.K.N. Karunarathna

² Physical Geography : Part I, Educational Publications Department Glossary

• Environmental balance- mdßißl ;=,s;;dj- `Ç¼¯À \©{ø»

• Environmental system- mßir moaO;sh- `Ç¼¯ÀöuõSv

• Components- ixrpl- TÖ

• Bio system- ffcj moaO;sh- E°ºz öuõSv

• Modern technology- kj ;dlaIKh- |ÃÚ öuõÈÝm£®

• Production capacity- ksIamdok Odß;dj- EØ£zv C¯»ÍÄ

• Environmental imbalance- mdßißl wix;=,kh - `Ç¼¯À \©{ø»°ßø©• Fossil fuels- fmdis, bkaOk- _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò

• Environmental ethics- mßir wdpdr O¾u- `Ç¼¯À JÊUPö|ÔPÒ• Sustainable development- ;srir ixj¾Okh- ÷£suS A¤Â¸zv

• Urbanization- kd.ÍlrKh- |PµõUP®

• Central Environmental Authority - uOHu mßir wêldßh - ©zv¯ `ÇÀ AvPõµ \ø£• Coast Conservation Act - fjr< ixrlaIK mk; - Pøµ÷¯õµ¨ £õxPõ¨¦a \mh®

• National heritages - cd;sl Wreu- ÷u]¯ ©µ¦›ø©PÒ

Physical features and human or cultural features of a landscape

is presented by maps. It is expected to study the physical and cultural features presented in the topographic maps of Sri Lanka

in this unit.

Reading of 1:50 000 Topographic Maps of

Sri Lanka

5

84

For free distribution

1:50,000, Topographic maps of Sri Lanka

You have studied the scale, size of a topographic map as well as selected physical and cultural features presented in a topographic map in grade eight.Ninety two map sheets have been prepared to the scale of 1: 50 000 to show the topographic features of Sri Lanka. The key that consists of conventional signs and symbols shown in the lower margin of the outer border of the map sheet can be used to read physical and cultural features presented in these topographical maps. Identify the convectional signs and symbols shown in the lower margin of the outer border using a 1:50 000 topographic map found in your school.

So far you have studied that relief features are presented in 1:50 000 topographic maps by contour lines. Topographic features can be easily identified by understanding the distribution of contour lines.

All things built on the physical environment by the intervention of man are called cultural features.

1

3

4

5

6789

10

11

12

13

14

15

1617181920

2

Map 5.1 - A segment of a 1:50 000 topographic map

85For free distribution

Figure 5.1 - Conventional signs and symbols of 1:50 000 topographic maps

86

For free distribution

Activities

1. Study the key shown in figure 5.1 well.

2. After studying map 5.1 thoroughly, name the physical and cultural features used from 1 - 20, according to the numbers separately.

3. Draw these features using conventional colours and symbols.

Physical Features

Several selected physical features found in a 1:50 000 topographic maps are shown below.

²Plain

²Highland

²Main river

²Tributary

Plain - A plain is a flat area on land. A plain in a map can be identified by the widening of the gap among the contour lines. Even in a plain, small higher places are found scattered. Such places can be identified by a spot height. (Figure 5.2)

Highland - Regions located at higher elevation are called highlands. A highland can be identified in a topographic map as contour lines that are distributed close to each other.

Highland

Figure 5.1- Plain

Plain

² River valley

² Island

² Point/ Head

² Bay

Let us identify physical and cultural features of 1:50,000 topographic map of Sri Lanka by studying a segment of it.

Map 5.2 - Plain and highland

87For free distribution

River Valley - Elongated low lands located among highlands are called valleys. Main rivers and tributaries flow through valleys.

Main river - Massive water which flows to a lake or to the ocean across an area from a highland is know as a main river.

Tributary - Small water streams from which water is provided to the main river are known as tributary.

Map 5.3 - River valley

Figure 5.3 - River valley

Various topographic features are found in coastal areas too. Islands, point, bay are some of them.

Fig 5.4 - Island, Point and Bay

Koddiyar BayDondra Head

Pigeon Island

Island - Small land areas surrounded by the sea are called islands. Many islands are located on the North East coast close to Jaffna peninsula.

88

For free distribution

Point - Narrow pieces of land that jut out towards the sea are also found in the coastal belt. They are known as heads or points.

Bay - The sea area that indents into land is called a bay.

Figure 5.4 - Island, Point and bay

Cultural features

Several cultural features selected from a 1: 50 000 topographic map are used for studying.

² District Boundary

² Express ways

² Main Roads (A and B Grade)

² Other Roads (Secondary/ Not main)

² Railway Lines

² Paddy, Tea, Coconut, Rubber and Home gardens

² Religious Places

² School, Hospital, Police, and Post OfficeFigure 5.5. - Different cultural features

District

Express way

Main Road (A) Grade

Main Road (B) Grade

Secondary

Minor Roads (Jeep & Cart)

Broad Gauge Single (Tracks)

Broad Gauge Double Line (Tracks)

Post/Sub Post Office

Police Station/Court

Buddhist/Hindu Temple

Church/Mosque

School/Hospital

Paddy

Tea

Rubber

Coconut

Other Plantations/Garden Lands

89For free distribution

These cultural features are shown on maps by different colours and symbols.

Map 5.5 - Point Pedro - New Map (2017)

The relationship between physical and cultural features

When you read 1: 50 000 topographic maps of Sri Lanka, it is clear that there is a relationship between the physical and cultural features. There is a close relationship between the physical features such as relief and drainage of a region and cultural features such as housing and settlements, land tenure, irrigation system and road network of that particular area. Physical features have been mostly utilized when the administrative boundaries are determined.

²Settlements are widely distributed in plains. Settlements in mountainous regions are distributed in low lands located in between mountain ranges and in valleys.

²The agricultural land use is distributed in accordance with the relief and drainage. This is clear in topographic maps.

²Paddy lands are distributed widely in river valleys in flat lands. They are also distributed as narrow belts along the river valleys in hilly areas.

New map are being printed by the Sri Lanka Survey Department using standard symbols and colours. Map 5.5 indicates Point Pedro, an extraction of Map no 02, which is completed up to now.Symbols and colours of these new maps have been altered.

90

For free distribution

²Tea cultivation in hilly areas, rubber cultivation on slopes at medium elevation and coconut cultivation in coastal regions and suburbs are seen.

²It is clear that relief has influenced the construction of tanks and irrigation systems. Tanks have been built damming the rivers by constructing bunds at the place where they flow through the gaps in ridges. Water is supplied through the canals constructed following the gradient of the land.

²The physical features have influenced the construction of main roads too. Though the road network runs straightly on flat regions, in a hilly region it runs according to the relief. River valleys and river gaps have been mostly used in road construction.

²When administrative boundaries are decided, it is clear that, they have been based on physical features like rivers and mountain ranges.

Observe the relationship between physical and cultural features using the segments of topographical maps provided.

5.6 and 5.7 - Relationship between physical and cultural features

Answer the questions based on Map 5.81. Name three physical features shown in the map 5.82. Name the types of roads which have been mapped out.3. Name three cultivation of crops that can be seen in the region.4. What is the administrative boundary separated by the river?5. Write five sentences indicating the relationship between relief and crop cultivation

Activity

91For free distribution

Map 5.8 - Segment of 1:50, 000 topographic map

92

For free distribution

Activity

Across

1. Widely distributed in plains

3. A famous plain in Sri Lanka.

5. The largest water bodies.

7. Row of bushes or small trees

Down

1. Cultural feature shown in key.

2. A method of farming in hilly regions.

4. The direction shown in maps

6. The longest river in the world

93For free distribution

References

² Physical environment of the earth - H.K.N. Karunarathna

² Sri Lanka map collection - School Print - 2nd Edition, Sri Lanka Servay Department

² Physical Geography - Part I - Educational Publications Department

Glossary

• Physical features- fN!;sl ,laIK- ö£ÍvP A®\[PÒ

• Cultural features- ixialD;sl ,laIK- £s£õmk A®\[PÒ

• Plain ;eks;,dj- \©öÁÎ

• Highland- Wiaìu-- E¯º{»®

• Main river- m%Odk .x.dj- ¤µuõÚ BÖ

• Tributary- w;= .x.dj - QøÍ¯õÖ

• River valley- .x ksïkh- BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS

• Island- ¥m;-- wÄ

• District boundary- Èia;%slal udhsu- ©õÁmh GÀø»

• Expressway- wêfõ.S ud¾.h- Av÷ÁP ö|kg\

õø»PÒ • Highways - uydud¾.- ö£¸¢öu¸UPÒ