==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution51

UNIT 05

ONCE UPON A TIME

Activity 1

Act out

Arjuna: Mother, how did this world begin? Mother: Well, there are many different ideas about that. Radhika, why don’t you tell your brother what you learnt about it at school?Radhika: Scientists believe that the earth was created from a ball of dust and gas. The earth was very hot then. Gradually, it cooled down and hardened.Arjuna: Wow! What happened after that?

Radhika: The land, the sea and the atmosphere began to form but there was no life on Earth.Arjuna: Nothing at all?Radhika: Nothing at all. Life first began in the sea as a bacterium. Plants appeared next on land, followed by animals.

For free distribution52

Arjuna: Oh, really? When did dinosaurs come into the world?

Radhika: Dinosaurs appeared much later. Amphibians and reptiles

were there before them, but birds and mammals came later.

Arjuna: How about people?

Radhika: Humans appeared on Earth last. Some scientists believe

that humans evolved from apes. Early humans hunted and gathered food. Later, they learnt to make tools and to use fire.

Arjuna: What happened to the dinosaurs?

Radhika: Why don’t you find it out yourself? I have a book and a DVD

on dinosaurs. You can read the book or watch the DVD.

Activity 2

Read the conversation and complete the flow chart.

First, life..........

Finally humans appeared on Earth.

The first living things on Earth

were...............

The earth was created from a ball

of dust and gas.

Then, .....................

For free distribution53

and/ but/orWe can combine sentences using and / but / or.

The earth cooled down.The earth cooled down and hardened.The earth hardened.Early humans hunted.Early humans hunted and gathered food.They gathered food.The land, sea and atmosphere began to form.The land, sea and atmosphere began to form but there was no life on Earth.There was no life on Earth.You can read the book.You can read the book or watch the DVD.You can watch the DVD.

Activity 3

Reading and Writing

Combine the sentences using and / but / or.

1. Early people lived in caves. They painted pictures on the walls.

2. Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone in 1876. It was very different from the phones we use today.

3. In the Stone Age people didn’t build houses. They did not use metal tools.

Activity 4

Speaking

Speak in groups about the journey of human civilization. Take turns and speak at least one sentence. Make use of the given facts. You may combine sentences.

For free distribution54

• Began to walk on two legs• Started to use simple stone tools, began to use fire• Built a shelter from large bones of animals• Lived in groups• Did not farm. Hunted and gathered food• Started using bows and arrows• Started to live in one place longer• Discovered metal, started to make tools • Started agriculture and rearing animals• Started to live in villages, built houses of wattle and daub• Had free time after harvesting, began to engage in dancing, music

Activity 5

Writing

Describe the following picture of early civilization. You may use the phrases in Activity 4.

For free distribution55

Activity 6

Reading

Read the passages and match them with the questions given.ADinosaurs were a group of prehistoric animals. They lived on Earth a long time ago. They had scaly skin, lived on the land and laid eggs. The word dinosaur means ‘terrible reptile’ in ancient Greek.

BThere were no humans on Earth when dinosaurs lived on it. Dinosaurs first appeared on Earth about 230 million years ago. They lived here for about 165 million years. The period in which they lived is called the Mesozoic Era.

CWe learn about dinosaurs by looking at dinosaur fossils. Fossils are the preserved remains of living things. First dinosaur fossils were found in England in the 1920’s. Scientists who study fossils are called paleontologists.

DDifferent dinosaurs ate different things. Some dinosaurs were meat-eaters or carnivores. Among them Tyrannosaurus Rex was the most dangerous. Dinosaurs such as Diplodocus and Stegosaurus were plant eaters or herbivores. Some dinosaurs were omnivores. They believed to have eaten plants, insects and reptiles.EAbout 65 million years ago dinosaurs became extinct or disappeared from the earth. Scientists have different ideas about how they became extinct. The most popular idea is that while they were living on Earth, a huge meteorite crashed into it. After that the earth became very cold. Dinosaurs and other reptiles could not bear the extreme weather and died.

For free distribution56

1.What were dinosaurs?2. When did dinosaurs live on Earth?3. How do we learn about dinosaurs?4. What did dinosaurs eat?5. How did dinosaurs become extinct?

Activity 7

Reading

Find the meanings of the following words from the text.

• Dinosaur• Fossils• Paleontologists• Carnivores• Herbivores• Omnivores• Became extinct

When/whileRead these sentences.

• There were no humans on Earth when dinosaurs lived on it.• While dinosaurs were living on Earth, a huge meteorite crashed into it.

Activity 8

Join these sentences with “when.”

1. I visited the museum. I saw a skeleton of a whale.2. Christopher Columbus landed in the Bahamas. He thought he was near China.

For free distribution57

Combine these sentences using “while.”1. I was looking at the sky. I saw a shooting star.2. The Earth revolves around the sun. It rotates around itself.

Activity 9

Listening

Your teacher will read out some descriptions about the history of some toys and amusements. Listen to them and match A with B.

A B

b. Invented by George Washington

Ferris Jr. in 1893.

1. Fireworks

2. Ferris wheel

3. Kaleidoscope

4. Crossword puzzles

a. Invented by Arthur Wynne in 1913.

c. Invented in China about 2000 years ago.

d. Invented by Sir David Brewster in 1816.

For free distribution58

Activity 10

Writing

Read the given description about Munidasa Cumaratunga.

Munidasa Cumaratunga Munidasa Cumaratunga was born on 25th July 1887. He was a writer, poet, journalist and grammarian. He wrote many Sinhala story books. Heenseraya, Hathpana, Magulkema and Kiyawana Nuwana are some of them. These books are popular among children even today.

Munidasa Cumaratunga founded the “Hela Havula” movement to promote the correct usage of the Sinhala language. He wrote Sinhala grammar books and had a wide knowledge of other languages like Tamil, Pali, Sanskrit, Greek and Latin. In his lifetime, he served as a school teacher, principal and school inspector. This eminent scholar passed away on 2nd March 1944.

For free distribution59

Read the details given about three other well-known Sri Lankans. Select one of them and write a similar description.

Ananda Samarakoon (13th Jan. 1911- 05th April 1962)• Musician and composer• Composed the National Anthem of Sri Lanka• Considered the father of artistic Sri Lankan music • Founded a musical tradition of our own• Composed many songs e.g. :- “Ase Madura Jeewanaye geetha, Akke Akke Ara Balannako”• A gifted painter

Ananda Coomaraswamy (22nd Aug.1877- 09th Sep. 1947)• Philosopher, historian and geologist• Studied at London University. • Was interested in many fields: art, literature, language, religion• Founder of Ceylon Social Reform Society• This society was interested in preserving traditional arts and crafts, customs and traditions

Siddi Lebbe (11th June1838 - 05th Feb. 1898)•A scholar, educationist and a Muslim community leader•Worked hard to uplift the lives of Muslims•Lawyer by profession•A member of the Kandy Municipal Council•Founded many Muslim schools•Printed school books and distributed them for free

For free distribution60

Activity 11

Speaking

Give a short speech about a famous Sri Lankan.

Examples :- D.S. Senanayake, Lakshman Kadirgamar, T.B. Jayah, Martin Wickramasinghe, Lester James Peiris