==== BLOCKS ==== 

91For free distribution

NATURE

09

Kanneliya

Discover, explore and conserve the natural beauty of Sri Lanka.

LocationKanneliya Forest Reserve is located in the Galle District in the Southern Province about 125 km away from Colombo. It is one of the largest forest reserves with a high bio-diversity in Sri Lanka.

WaterfallsInside the forest there are many streams adding life to the vegetation. Although deforestation has affected them, these streams create several beautiful cascades.

There is a high rainfall in Kanneliya from May to July and again in the months of October and November, making it an ideal time to see waterfalls. The Anagimale falls is the closest waterfall to the entrance of the forest reserve. It is just 2 km away from the entrance. You need to go a little deeper into the forest to see the beautiful waterfall called Narangas Ella.

Bio- diversity

There are 301 plant species at Kanneliya forest reserve, some 133 animal species and 59 species of birds making it very rich in biodiversity.HikingThe water level of the streams is low from March to April and August to September. Those are ideal times to visit Kanneliya for hiking.

92For free distribution

Activity 01

Reading and WritingMatch the words with their meanings according to the context. Then do Activity 02 that are given in your workbook using those words.

Words Meanings

● bio-diversity plants taken collectively● species plentiful● vegetation walking in the countryside for pleasure or sport● cascade variety of species of plant and animal life within a region● reserve a group of animals or plants having common characteristics● hiking process of destroying a forest● abundant place allocated for special use● deforestation small waterfall

Activity 02

Reading

Read the brochure on Kanneliya and fill in the grid. Then do activities no.03, 04 and 05 in your workbook for more practice on describing places.

Kanneliya

LocationDistance from Colombo/ or main cityImportanceAttractionsBest time to visit

93For free distribution

Activity 03

1) Read the passage about Kanneliya and say whether the following statements are true (T) or false (F).

1. Kanneliya is the one and only forest reserve in Sri Lanka. □ 2. There is a variety of wildlife in the Kanneliya Forest Reserve. □3. March is a good time to visit Kanneliya to see the waterfalls. □4. Deforestation has affected the water levels of the streams. □5. Hiking is difficult in the month of June. □

2) Which of the following is the main idea of this passage? • There are many places of natural beauty like Kanneliya in Sri Lanka. • Kanneliya is an ideal destination for nature lovers. • Kanneliya cannot be visited throughout the year due to climatic conditions.

Activity 04

Writing

Work in small groups.Read the information given about popular tourist destinations in Sri Lanka. Select one place and find more information and pictures of that place. Then write an article about it to be displayed on your wall newspaper.

94For free distribution

Delft Island ♦ 40 minute - drive from Jaffna♦ ferry service to the island♦ nearly one hour’s journey from the jetty♦ the 'Growing Stone' worshipped by Hindu devotees at an annual festival organised by the nearby Kovil is a centre of attraction♦ part of the island is reserved for the wild horses and ponies to roam freely.♦ fresh water supply at 'Devil's Well'♦ the giant 'baobab tree'♦ the old stables of the Dutch era and the giant foot prints

Nuwara Eliya♦ 3 hour- drive from Colombo♦ famous waterfalls such as Devon and St.Clair are situated close to Nuwara Eliya ♦ Lake Gregory in the heart of the city is a much sought out tourist attraction♦ motor racing events in April♦ Haggala botanical garden is famous for a number of species of orchids and roses♦ Hortain plains close to Nuwara Eliya is a protected area

Polonnaruwa♦ 4 hour-drive from Colombo♦ the second capital of Sri Lanka after the destruction of Anuradhapura♦ the monumental ruins of the fabulous garden- city created by King Parakramabahu I in the 12th century.♦ the Lankatilaka Vihara, an enormous brick structure which has preserved a colossal image of Buddha ♦ the Gal Vihara, with its gigantic rock sculptures♦ the Tivanka Pilimage, where wall paintings of the 13th century illustrate the jataka stories♦ Parakrama Samudra, an excellent creation of our irrigation systems

95For free distribution

Activity 05

Speaking

Work in pairs.Imagine you are a tourist interested in visiting beautiful places in Sri Lanka. After reading the articles, you decide to visit one of the places. Work with your partner to write the telephone conversation you will have with a travel agency regarding the trip you are going to have and act it out.

Your converstion may include information about:

-the best time of the year to visit the place-how to get there-what you can see or do there-whether tour guides are available

Activity 06

ListeningListen to the dialogue and fill in the gaps. Then report to the class details about the annual trip of Gemunu Maha Vidyalaya.

1. The students of Gemunu Maha Vidyalaya visited ……………………......... (Nilaweli, Pasdikuda).2. It is in the …………………… (Batticaloa, Mannar) District.3. It is …………………. (218, 288) km away from Colombo.4. It is very important as a place of ……………………(historical value, tourist attraction).5. The students were fascinated by the beauty of the ……...………… (jungle, beach).

96For free distribution

Activity 07

Reading and Writing

The students of Gemunu Maha Vidyalaya are planning to hold a poster competition on the theme “Let’s Recycle Our Waste”. This is the announcement they have prepared to inform the students of the competition. Read it aloud. Next write a note to your friend who is absent from school informing him/ her about the competition.

Announcement

The Environmental Society of Gemunu Maha Vidyalaya has organized a poster competition on the theme “Let’s Recycle Our Waste” to mark the Earth Day. The competition will be held on 5th June 2013 from 8 a.m onwards at the Main Hall of the school. Students from grade 6 to 13 can take part in the competition. More details will be displayed on the Environmental Society noticeboard.

Now do activity 07 of your workbook.

Activity 08

Speaking

The teacher will divide the class into two groups. Each group should find information for and against the following topic:“Using traditional methods is better than using modern technology in agriculture.”Select students to represent your group and have a class debate on the above topic.

Here are some guidelines to help you:

97For free distribution

Moderator:Ladies and gentlemen! We welcome you all. The topic of today’s debate is “………………...” Let me introduce our two debating teams. On my right we have the proposing team who will speak for the topic. On my left we have the opposing team who will oppose the proposition team’s point of view.Now please welcome the leader of the proposing team.

Useful language expressions for presenting your arguments:

It is obvious that ............

To begin with………

We believe that ……...

In addition to that ….....

We agree …........

Furthermore ……...

We disagree ……...

However ..…....

In conclusion ….....

I strongly agree...........

We support the view that ...…...

To sum up …….

Contrary to what you say …....

We can prove that .......

I stress the fact that ......

98For free distribution

Learning PointAdjectives

Adjectives can be formed by adding suffixes to nouns or verbs.Following are some examples. Discuss with your teacher and find other examples for suffixes that can be added to form adjectives.

success + -ful → successfulcare + -less → carelesseffect + -ive → effectivetrouble + -some → troublesomemystery + -ous → mysterious

Activity 09

Writing

Form suitable adjectives using the nouns given in brackets and fill in the blanks.

1. There are many ………………… (attract) places in Sri Lanka.2. Most ………………… (medicine) plants can be found in the forests. 3. Nobody likes the ………………. (fear) experience of natural disasters.4. The lecture on Disaster Management was very …………… (inform) to the students.5. Watching a waterfall in a dark evening is an …………….. (awe) experience.6. There are many …………………. (luxury) hotels in places of tourist attraction.7. Most of the teenagers prefer …………………… (adventure) travel to indoor activities.8. For some people, mountain climbing is a ……………….. (tire) experience.

99For free distribution

Activity 10

Fill in the following table with the other forms of the words given.

NounVerbAdjective

educationbeautifycarefulmanageablequarrel

wonderlovestudyhopeless

Learning PointPrepositions (2)

till, towards, until, round, since, within, off

Read the following sentences paying attention to the underlined prepositions.

● There will be extra English classes till 3 o’ clock every Friday.● You have to walk a few meters towards the town to get to the bank.● The office will be closed for business until Monday because of Christmas.● The director board sat round the table for hours discussing the problem.● She has been waiting to meet the director since 8 o’clock.● My uncle lives within a few miles off Colombo.● Farzana fell down and injured her leg when she was getting off the bus.

100For free distribution

Activity 11

Fill in the blanks selecting a suitable preposition from those given within brackets.

1. I walked ……………….. (towards, within) the building looking for the

entrance.

2. You have to do revision exercises ……………… ( since, till) you are

proficient in the subject.

3. The farmers will make the land ready…………….. ( till, until) they get rain.

4. You have to get …………………. (off, round) the bus at the junction and

walk to the school.

5. We have been learning English …………… (till, since) we were in Grade 3.

Activity 12

Fill in the blanks with a suitable preposition from the given list.

around, till, since, towards, until

Selvan walked ………………… the room feeling a little excited. It was his

first job interview. He did not want to apply for any job ………………. he

finished his computer course. He had been following it ……………….. 2010.

Now that it is over, he is ready to start a job. He waited …………….. the

interviewers asked him to sit down and then he thanked them. Then he looked

………………… the room. He felt relaxed when the interviewers asked him to

talk about himself.