==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution73

UNIT 07

AROUND THE COUNTRY

Reading

Ruvini is ready to deliver a speech at the morning assembly.

“Good morning, Dear teachers and my dear friends, Today I’m going to speak about “Travelling”. “The world is a book and those who do not travel read only one page.” This was said by St. Austin, a well-known philosopher. This great saying clearly indicates the importance of travelling. Travelling is simply to move from one

location to another and we can travel by train, bus, car, plane, ship, boat and on foot. Reasons for travelling can be for pleasure, gathering information, holidaying and visiting people. Travelling is another way to spend our time meaningfully and enjoyably. It brings about a change in our lives. Climbing a mountain, going for a walk or a boat ride, spending time on a beach or a national park and visiting a museum or a historical place give us new experiences and knowledge. Travelling teaches us to appreciate nature and aesthetic beauty. We can hear the chirping of birds and the songs of the sea, rivers and waterfalls. It creates wonderful memories in our mind. When we travel, we can get to know about other cultures. We may even meet new friends and experience adventure.

My dear friends, as today is the last day of the term, it’s time to take a break, freshen up your mind and enjoy yourself. Thank you!

For free distribution74

Activity 1

Answer the following questions.

1. What is the topic of Ruvini’s speech?2. Write the saying mentioned in the speech. Explain its meaning.3. Who said it?4. What is travelling?5. Complete the sentence.

We travel for ………………… , …………… , ………………..… and ………………. 6. Write five advantages of travelling.7. Do you like travelling? Give reasons.8. Discuss with your friends and write a list of places that you would like to visit in Sri Lanka.e.g. :- • Sigiriya • Peradeniya Botanical Gardens

Activity 2

Match the words in column A with their meanings in column B.

A B• philosopher - an exciting or dangerous experience• historical - relating to education or study• academic - a person who studies about the nature and meaning of life• aesthetic - belonging to the past• adventure - connected with beauty

Activity 3

Fill in the blanks with the suitable words. Read them aloud.

fees, piece, peace, pile, file, pit, fit, pil, fill, pull, full, fine, pine, physics, philosophy, sake, shake, said, shed, sell, shell, sip, ship, sheep, seap, soap, shop, shake, sake, saw, sow, show

pullfullsaid shed

For free distribution75

AffixesThe word class and/or the meaning of words are changed by adding affixes.• un, dis, re (prefixes)• ful, less, ness, ly, fully, er, est (suffixes)e.g. :- - Restart the match. - Travel is another way to spend our time meaningfully. - It creates wonderful memories. a) The meaning of the word is changed, but the word class is the

same.• adjective - adjective (opposite) happy - unhappy honest - dishonest • adjective adjective (comparative) long - longer short - shorter• adjective - adjective (superlative) long - longest short - shortest• verb - verb (opposite) lock - unlock tie - untie

The word class and/or the meaning of the word are changed.• verb - adjective care - careful/careless colour - colourful• noun - adjective wonder - wonderful meaning - meaningful• adjective - noun kind - kindness happy - happiness• adjective - adverb kind - kindly happy - happily

For free distribution76

Activity 4

Read the following word list and change the word by adding affixes. Add more words.

cold, kind, beauty, wonder, ill, cheer, friend, thin

- ness- ful- ly - er

Activity 5

Fill in the blanks with the words from the table above.

Ruvini’s brother, Nirmal enjoys photography as it’s his favourite hobby. He likes to take beautiful photographs of people and objects whenever he is free. He has a ………………collection of photographs at home.Last week, Nirmal went on a trip to Nuwara Eliya with his family. The weather was ………….. than that of Colombo. There were different kinds of ……………………. flowers there. While he was visiting a few famous places in Nuwara Eliya, he met Raj, one of his childhood friends. He is a very ……………….. and ………… boy. Nirmal met his friend after a long time and Raj looked ……………………… than earlier. He was visiting his uncle at the hospital. He was suffering from a terminal ……………. Raj invited Nirmal’s family to visit him in Jaffna during their holiday. They thanked him for his …………………….. and said good bye.

For free distribution77

Reading

A Trip to JaffnaNirmal and his family planned a trip to visit Raj in Jaffna during the vacation.

They were packing their bags to go to Jaffna. It began to rain heavily and they were highly worried if they would be able to go on the trip tomorrow. However, the next morning turned out to be fine. They arrived at the Colombo Fort railway station early. There were many passengers waiting for the train. The train reached the railway station slowly and they got into the train quickly. It was the Yal Devi intercity express train and it left the railway station at 5.50 a.m. The train went fast. Their father met one of his old friends in the train unexpectedly. They reached Jaffna safely at about 12.30 in the afternoon. It was an unforgettable journey for them.

AdverbsAdverbs describe the action.

It was raining heavily. The train went fast.

For free distribution78

1. Adverbs are mainly formed by adding –ly to the adjectives.

Adjective Adverbslow slowlyhigh highlyquick quicklyunexpected unexpectedlysad sadlykind kindlyneat neatlybeautiful beautifullycareful carefullysafe safelywarm warmly

e.g. :- Raj is a kind person. (adjective) He spoke kindly. (adverb) It was a safe journey. (adjective) They reached Jaffna safely. (adverb)

2. Adverbs that are also used as adjectives.

Adjective Adverbhard hardfast fastearly early

e.g. :- It was a fast train. (adjective) The train went fast. (adverb)

3. ‘Well’ is the adverb of the adjective ‘good’.

Adjective Adverbgood well

e.g. :- He is a good student. (adjective) He studies well. (adverb )

For free distribution79

Activity 6

Fill in the blanks with suitable adverbs given above.

1. The train went ....................... and they arrived at Jaffna by 12.30 p.m.2. Raj and his family members welcomed them .......................................3. They treated Nirmal and his family members ......................................4. On the last day they said “Good bye” to each other ...............................5. They enjoyed their tour ...............................................

Ruvini visited many places in Jaffna. Amaya and Rajesh also had visited different places during the vacation. These are the articles that they wrote for their class wallpaper.

A Charming Paradise

“Neduntheev” is an island of the Northern Province. It is also known by its Dutch name Delft. It is an island located in the Palk Strait. The island’s area is 50 km² and it is roughly oval-shaped. Neduntheev is a flat island surrounded by shallow waters and beaches of coral chunks and sand. The vegetation consists of palmyrah palms, dry shrubs and grass that grow on the soil. In the

western coast of the island there are remains of a 1000 year old ancient temple built by the Chola Dynasty, as well as the ruins of a Dutch colonial fort. The island should be reached by sea and it takes about one hour to reach the destination. The local people earn their living by fishing and selling palmyrah products. It was an unforgettable journey as

the island is famous for its unspoiled natural beauty.

For free distribution80

This is Amaya’s article.

A Wonderful Creation

Sigiriya Rock Fortress is considered as one of the world heritages nominated by UNESCO. It is located in the Central Province of Sri Lanka. This fortress was built by King Kashyapa. He built his palace on the top of this rock and decorated its sides with colourful

frescoes. It is nearly 100 metres high. One could see the Lion Gate, the Mirror Wall, landscaped gardens, water gardens and caves in Sigiriya. The fountains are still active during the rainy season. It is one of the best preserved examples of ancient urban planning and is the most visited historic site in Sri Lanka. It’s our duty to protect this ancient monument.

Rajesh wrote this article.

An Invaluable Gift Galle Fort, in the Bay of Galle on the southwest coast of Sri Lanka, was built first in 1588 by the Portuguese. It is a historical, archaeological and architectural heritage monument. The fort has a colourful history, and today it has a multi-ethnic and multi-religious population.

Some famous monuments such as the Lighthouse, the Clock Tower, the Dutch Reformed Church and the Anglican Church, the Meera Mosque, the Buddhist Temple, National Maritime Museum and the Old Dutch Hospital are found inside the fort. The Sri Lankan government is trying to make this one of the modern wonders of the world. The heritage value of

the fort has been recognized by UNESCO and the site has been named as a cultural heritage.

For free distribution81

Activity 7

Now complete the grid.

NameLocationImportanceInteresting Places/ Features/

Events1. Delft Northern Province

- It is an island.- It has an unspoiled natural beauty.

2.

3.

Activity 8

Select one place you like the most out of the three descriptions given above and speak about it.

Activity 9

Group Work

Select another famous place in Sri Lanka. Write an article about it and display it in the class wallpaper.

For free distribution82

Activity 10

Writing

Rizwi received a letter from his pen friend Tony, last week.1135, Green Drive,Los Angeles, California,USA.93103.22nd March 2016

Dear Rizwi,

Thank you very much for your letter. You had written in detail about your visit to the Nilaweli beach. I enjoyed reading it a lot. I wish I could visit your beautiful country some day.

Next week, I hope to go rock climbing with my friends. Do you also like rock climbing? I like it because it is exciting and adventurous, but it is a difficult and dangerous sport. However, it is important to concentrate on how to get to the top. When you are there, you feel that you can see the entire world and enjoy nature. Sometimes, I feel frightened, but it’s a great experience. I have sent a photograph for you with the letter. Write to me about what you like to do during your free time.

I hope you and your family are keeping well.

With love, Tony

Write a letter to Tony, write about what you like to do in your free time.

For free distribution83

Activity 11

Writing

Use the given facts and write a description about any of these topics.

Mihintale

• A mountain peak near Anuradhapura.• A sacred place of worship for the Buddhists in Sri Lanka.• The place where Arahat Mahinda met King Devanampiyatissa.• Pilgrims go to worship Mihintale on Poson full moon Poya day (in June).• Many shrines and ruins can be seen.• Ambasthala stupa, The Kantaka stupa, Naga Pokuna (Snake

Pond), Mihindu cave are some of them.

Traditional Foot Pilgrimage to Kataragama (PadaYathrei)

• A two month pilgrimage from Nagadeepa in Jaffna to Kataragama

shrine dedicated to God Skanda Murugan. • Mostly Hindu devotees, but people of other religions also

participate.• Takes place in the months of May, June and July.• Commences at an auspicious time.• Covers about 5-6 miles a day.• Pilgrims rest at places of worship where they receive alms.• Arrive in Kataragama for the annual Esala festival and Perahera.• The pilgrims are mostly dressed in yellow clothes.

For free distribution84

Shrine of Our Lady of Madhu

• Considered one of the holiest shrines of Roman Catholics in Sri

Lanka.• Situated in Mannar district.• A statue of Virgin Mary holding infant Jesus is placed in the

church.• The most popular feast is on the 15th of August, annually.• Celebrates the assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary into

Heaven on this day.• Catholic pilgrims from all over the country come to the church to worship.

Activity 12

Read the poem and answer the questions.

Little bird upon the treeCome and sing a song to me.I am sitting here alone,Come and sit upon this stone.But the little bird said, ‘No!Mother will not let me go.You will shut me up, and IWant to hop about and fly.’ (Better English – By Ronald Ridout)

1. Where was the little bird?2. Was the writer alone?3. Did the bird like to come to the writer?4. Which words in the poem rhyme with the given words? a) tree b) alone c) no5. What did the little bird want to do?

For free distribution85

Activity 13

Listening

Listen to the text and underline the correct answer.

1. The house belongs to

a) Tin Tan b) Tin Ton c) Tin Tin

2. How can you go there?

a) by boat b) by helicopter c) by boat or helicopter

3. The number of bed rooms is

a) 20 b) 12 c) 15

4. .......................... are on the wall of each room.

a) framed pictures b) clocks

c) wall hangings d) video screens

5. The library contains ...........................

a) books only b) books and maps

c) books and newspapers d) maps only

6. How many people can sit in the dining room?

a)18 b) 80 c) 800

7. Broowy is his

a) brother b) friendly dog c) neighbour

8. What can you see behind the house?

a) a valley b) a lake c) a mountain

d) a farm