==== BLOCKS ==== 

21For free distribution

tRAVeL

03

Role Play

Sethun : Hi, what are you going to draw?Shakthi : I am going to draw a monorail.Ravindi : What is a monorail? Shakthi : Can't you guess? Mono means single…Ravindi : Ah! Got it. A train that travels along a single rail.Shakthi : I will draw a tram....Sethun : What is that?Ravindi : I’ve seen one. Let me explain it to you. It’s a vehicle that runs on electricity. Sethun : Really?Ravindi : Yes, and they run on rails that are built on roads.Sethun : Does that mean that trams run on the road with other vehicles like buses and cars ? Ravindi : Yes, you're right.Sethun : That's exciting. Shakthi, I am sure that you will be an automobile engineer one day.Shakthi : Yes, it’s my ambition. What will you draw, Sethun?Sethun : I will draw a picture of the Wright brothers and a modern aeroplane.Ravindi : That’s great! I will draw a space shuttle.Shakthi : Once I travelled in a space shuttle. Sethun : Ah, when did you go to space?

22For free distribution

Shakthi : No, I didn't go to space. There was a model space shuttle at a carnival that I once went to and we could go inside the space shuttle and have a look. I will go to space one day. I want to be an astronaut...Sethun : Look at what I have got! A magazine with beautiful pictures on different modes of transport.Ravindi : Can you name these?

Activity 01

Writing Match the words with the pictures.

● skateboard ● canoe ● monorail ● tram ● space shuttle ● cable car ● motor car ● ferry ● train ● bicycle ● rocket ● bus ● hovercraft ● ship ● aeroplane

i

ab

h

f

ed

c

g

23For free distribution

j

k

l

n

m

o

Activity 02

ListeningListen to the text and fill in the following table.

Itinerary

DateTimeVenueActivities

24For free distribution

Enjoy singing!

Happy Wanderer I love to go a-wandering, Along the mountain track, And as I go, I love to sing, My knapsack on my back.

Chorus: Val-deri,Val-deraVal-deri,Val-dera-ha-ha-ha-ha-ha Val-deri,Val-dera.

My knapsack on my back.I love to wander by the stream That dances in the sun, So joyously it calls to me, "Come! Join my happy song!"

Chorus: I wave my hat to all I meet, And they wave back to me, And blackbirds call so loud and sweet From ev'ry green wood tree.

Chorus: High overhead, the skylarks wing, They never rest at home But just like me, they love to sing, As o'er the world we roam.

Chorus: Oh, may I go a-wandering Until the day I die! Oh, may I always laugh and sing, Beneath God's clear blue sky!

25For free distribution

Activity 03

WritingWrite true (T) or false (F).

i) The singer likes travelling. □ii) The singer invites the stream to join his song. □iii) The skylarks usually are in their nests. □iv) The sound of Blackbirds are sad. □v) The singer wishes to travel all his life. □

2) List the rhyming words in the song. E.g. track – back3) Select any stanza you like and draw a picture related to it.4) Write a list of things that the singer admires.

Activity 04

Speaking

Role play the dialogue.

At a hotel

Receptionist : Good morning sir, how can I help you? Tourist : I am here to inquire if a room has been reserved for me?Receptionist : Sir, may I know your name please?Tourist : I’m Michael Stephens.Receptionist : Let me see…( the register is being checked). A single room for two nights?Tourist : That’s right.Receptionist : We have arranged refreshment in the lobby, sir. Please follow me.Tourist : Thank you. But I want to see the room first.Receptionist : Sorry sir, it is being arranged at the moment. It will be ready in five minutes.Tourist : Oh, is it still being arranged? Then I’ll wait in the lobby.Receptionist : Is there anything else that you need to know?Tourist : No thank you. I hope everything is being attended to.Receptionist : Sure. Enjoy your stay here, sir.Tourist : Thank you.

26For free distribution

Activity 05

WritingConstruct meaningful sentences to describe what is being done in each picture. Follow the example.

1) floor - polish E.g. : The floor is being polished.

2) table - set

3) hall - decorate

4) cake - decorate

5) flowers - pick

6) bush - prune

27For free distribution

Activity 06

Form passive voice sentences to describe what is happening in the picture.

E.g.: The goods are being unloaded from a lorry.

Activity 07

Reading and Writing

The hotel crew is busy at work. The manager wants to check whether everything is going well. He asks the following questions. Read them carefully.

a) Is the food being served at this moment?b) Is the hall being decorated?c) Are the chairs being arranged?d) Are the two swimming pools being cleaned?

Form similar questions with the words given below.a) letter - type c) water - pump - into the poolb) dinner - prepare d) gift packs - distribute

28For free distribution

Activity 08

Read the following article and answer the questions given below.

The wheel has been an essential part of human life from the very early years of human civilisation. The wheel can be best described as a circular object that rotates on an axial bearing. The earliest wheels were known to be wooden disks with a hole in the middle for the axle. The word wheel first came from an Old English word. In Sanskrit, the wheel is called chakra to mean round or circle. It is believed that the wheel first originated around 3500 BC in Mesopotamia (part of modern -day Iraq) where it was used for chariots. Some argue that it was invented by the Mesopotamians, the Northern Caucasus and Central Europeans. Therefore, the issue of where the wheel originated in still remains a mystery. The next step in the evolution of the wheel was made by the Egyptians 1500 years later in 2000 BC when they used spokes in their wheels and proudly used them in their chariots while the Greeks have the honour of introducing the cross bar or the H-type wheel. The other significant developments in the evolution of the wheel includes the introduction of wire tension spoke in 1802 when G. F. Bauer obtained a patent for it and the introduction of a new type of tire in 1845 by R.W. Thompson which was improved later by John Dunlop in 1888. The wheel was one of the central technologies which boosted the industrial revolution. The invention of the wheel has contributed immensely to the development of technology and the most significant being the water wheel, the cog wheel and the spinning wheel. Some of the latest developments of the wheel include the propeller, the jet engine and flywheel and the turbine. The wheel which originated so long ago has passed through many stages of development and change and is now presented in very attractive forms. Today, one cannot even imagine any mechanism without a wheel, can you?

29For free distribution

1. Write true (T) or false (F). I. Technology would not have developed if we had not invented the wheel. II. The earliest wheels were made of rubber. III. The word ‘wheel’ came from Sanskrit.

2. Who invented wheels with spokes?3. Who possesses the patent for the wire tension spoke?

4. Complete the following flow chart to describe the evolution of the wheel.

....................................

3500 BC

originated

5. Find single words from the text for the following phrases.

I. belonging to a period of history -

II. involving a great or complete change -

III. most important -

6. Find antonyms / opposite words from the text for the following words.

1. unattractive -

2. modern -

3. dishonour -

7. What does ‘they’ in paragraph 2 refer to?

8. Give a suitable title to the text.

9. Write the main idea of the text in two sentences.

10.Imagine a world with no wheels. Write a short paragraph.

You can begin like this….

Before the invention of wheel, people had to walk long distances but today

people travel ................... because of .......................... . If there were no wheels,

people would.............................

30For free distribution

An Unforgettable Trip

The trip we made to Kataragama during my school holidays was an unforgettable

one. We left home early in the morning and reached Kataragama by the evening.

Everybody got out of the van and began to unload the baggage. My uncle got

on to the roof of the van and began to untie the rope so that they could unload

the pots and pans. We took our bags into the room to unpack our clothes. My

mother and aunt went to the kitchen to prepare dinner. After a few minutes I

heard them laughing loudly. They seemed to be enjoying the cooking. As we

were sleepy and tired we had our dinner and went to bed early.

The following morning, we woke up early and had a bath in the beautiful Menik

Ganga. Next, we went to the Kiri Vehera and the Kataragama Kovil. We waited

patiently in line at the Kovil to offer a basket of fruits to the Kataragama Deity.

We spent the rest of the day walking around the historic city of Kataragama.

I was very unhappy to see a lot of garbage left carelessly all around the city.

I wish that people were more thoughtful of the environment and were more

careful when they throw garbage. We all came back to the guest house later in

the evening and packed our bags quickly to go back home.

Learning Point

Affixes

The word class and / or the meaning of words are changed by adding affixes.

e.g.: un, ly, fully, ness, sion, someAffixes are of two types.

1. Prefixes (added at the beginning of the word)2. Suffixes (added to the end of the word)

31For free distribution

● The following affixes change the meaning of the word but the word class remains unchanged.

e.g: happy - unhappy (adj) (adj)

tie - untie (vb) (vb)

● The following affixes change the word class and perhaps the meaning of the word also change.

e.g: care - careless (vb) (adj)

beauty - beautiful (noun) (adj) sad - sadness (adj) (noun)

Activity 09

Read the following word list and change their word class using the affixes given. Copy the grid into your writing book and complete it.

bright, dark, great, develop, introduce, ready, advertise, trouble, create, immediate, quarrel, invite, thoughtful, truthful, mystery, judge, courage

-ness-ment-tion/-sion-some-ous-ly

32For free distribution

Activity 10

Fill in the blanks using appropriate words from the table you have completed.

1) Fire fighters arrived ................. .2) The ...............................of the country lies on our hands. 3) The students distributed the ......................................4) Never tell lies ............................... is a great human quality.5) The ..................................... child acted quickly and saved the crowd from the danger.

Activity 11

Reading

Work in groups of three and go through the image and read aloud the conversation given below.

Ama : What is this?Yusuf : I don’t know. My pen-pal from Chile has sent this. Meena : Hasn’t he mentioned what it is? It seems to be a leaflet.Yusuf : He has called it a travel B-R-O-C-H-U-R- E. How do we pronounce this word?Ama : Let’s look up in the dictionary for the pronunciation.Meena : Then we can learn the meaning, too.

33For free distribution

Activity 12

SpeakingStudy the different sounds made by ‘ch’.

/ ʧ / as in chair

/ ∫ / as in chef

/ k / as in characterch

Read aloud the words given in the following box. Categorize them according to the sound made by ‘ch’ and fill in the grid given in the work book. (Unit 3. Activity 09)

● parachute ● headache

● cholera ● chore

● chauffeur ● brochure

● chameleon ● machine

● chocolate ● sachet

● march past ● choir

● cache ● chaos

Read aloud and enjoy!

Tongue twisters

● I scream, you scream, we all scream for ice cream!● Kitty caught the kitten in the kitchen.● If two witches were watching two watches, which witch would watch which watch?● How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck wood?● I wish to wish the wish you wish to wish, but if you wish the wish the witch wishes, I won't wish the wish you wish to wish.