==== BLOCKS ==== 

Civic Education

Grade 9

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print 2017Second Print 2018Third Print 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0168-5

Published by : Educational Publications Department Printed by : RS. Printek (Pvt) Ltd. No.765/2, Waduwegama Road, Malwana.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka

Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya

Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha

Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Oba we apa vidya

Obamaya apa sathya

Oba we apa shakthi

Apa hada thula bhakthi

Oba apa aloke

Apage anuprane

Oba apa jeevana we

Apa mukthiya oba we

Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha

Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara

Eka mavakage daru kela bevina

Yamu yamu vee nopama

Prema vada sema bheda durerada

Namo, Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

xu jha; kf;fs; ehkhNthk;xd;Nw ehk; thOk; ,y;yk;ed;Nw clypy; XLk;xd;Nw ek; FUjp epwk;

mjdhy; rNfhjuu; ehkhNthk;xd;wha; thOk; tsUk; ehk; ed;wha; ,t; ,y;ypdpNyeyNk tho;jy; Ntz;Lkd;Nwh

ahtUk; md;G fUizAld;xw;Wik rpwf;f tho;e;jpLjy;nghd;Dk; kzpAk; Kj;Jky;y - mJNtahd;W kopahr; nry;tkd;Nwh.

Mde;j rkuf;Nfhd; ftpijapd; ngau;g;G.

v

Being innovative, changing with right knowledge,Be a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj KariyawasamMinister of Education

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

vii

Monitoring and Supervision

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka - Commissioner General Educational Publications Department

Direction

W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination

S. Dakshina Kasturiarachchi - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department Board of Editors

A.L.S. Abewickrama - Senior Lecturer, National Institute of Education Maharagama

Dhamma Dissanayaka - Senior Lecturer, Department of Political Science and Public Policy University of Colombo

Wasantha Senavirathna - Head, Department of Public and International Law, Faculty of Law, University of Colombo

Kusum Ranasingha - Lecturer, Ocean UniversityS. Dakshina Kasturiarachchi - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Board of Writers

Siril Shanthi Jayasinha - Manager (Retired), Teacher Center, Horana

G.G. Thusitha Priyantha Kumara - Teacher Service, Lumbini Vidyalaya, Colombo 5

H. Aruna Indrasena - In Service Advisor, Zonal Education Office, Balangoda

viii

W.H. Namal Renuka - Teacher Service, Eheliyagoda Central College

K.A. Nilantha Pushpakumara - Deputy Principal, Ashoka Vidyalaya, Colombo 10

Dumindra Hemageewaka Kudaligama - Teacher Service, Ananda College, Colombo

M.K. Kingsly Priyantha - Lecturer, Ruhunu National College of Education, Walahandoowa

Dr. W.M. Shyaminda Wanasingha - Senior Lecturer, Sri Lanka Open University, Nawala

D.M. Jayalath Bandara - Provincial English Trainer - Bilingual, Ku/Wayamba Royal College, Kurunagala

C.S.K. Kumarapperuma - Visiting lecturer - ELTU, University of Sri Jayawardenapura

M.P. Gunawardana - English trained teacher (Retired)

Vineeta Goonetilleke - English trained teacher (Retired)

IllustrationsAmitha Indirani - Assistant Director of Education, Zonel Education office, Gampaha

Cover PageThinoli Shenesha Kothalawala - IT Unit Educational Publications Department Technical Assistance

P.A.D. Nisansala Sandamali - IT Unit Educational Publications Department

ix

01 Social Security

02 Contemporary Changes

03 Democratic Governance

04 Local Government Institutions

05 Conflict Resolution

06 World of Work

Index

1-28

29-71

72-95

96-116

117-126

127-162

x

1For free distribution

Introduction Working together is a basic feature that can be seen in a society. Each individual in a society has the right to a life of freedom away from fear and suspicion. Having established that right, social security is strengthened.

Family, school, religious institutions and social institutions render a special service to establish social security. The government has also established various institutions and special mechanisms to ensure social security.

Several factors contribute to social security. Citizens in a society need to be well-educated and self disciplined. They need to show respect towards others in dealing with them. These factors contribute heavily to social security in a cohesive multi-cultural society.

Social security is a factor that affects the personal development, social development and national development in a society. By studying this chapter, you will be able to achieve a wide knowledge about the following:

²Individual and society ²Social security ²Institutes that contribute to social security ²The mechanisms as well as laws and rules that are utilized to establish social security ²Duties and responsibilities of an individual to influence social security

1.1 Individual and Society

1.1.1 Introducing society

Family is the basic unit in a society. Society is a collection of several families. A group of people living in certain geographical region working in collaboration to achieve their various needs is a basic feature of a society. They establish various institutes, societies and organizations for that. Accordingly, society is a collection of individuals and organizations.

Social Security01

2For free distribution

Individual

Family Society

Every person is a member of some society. They maintain frequent inter relationships to fulfill their needs.

Each society has its own customs, rules and regulations, acceptances, ethics, agreements and traditions. They are common features to all societies. These common features contribute to make the societies colourful.

By nature, societies of the modern day are very complex. Therefore, to fulfill their needs, it has become very necessary for individuals to maintain cordial relationships with others. Everyone needs the help of different people and social institutions. Strong relationships between individuals in a society contribute to peaceful co-existence.

1.1.2 Social security

Society must ensure protection and security for a person to live free from doubt and fear, safeguarding one's interests. Simply, it can be introduced as social security. Establishing social protection and good existence to the maximum is essential for the social development.

People need to accept and honour the rules and regulations in any society. This ensures social security. At the same time, to ensure social security, it is essential to organize both people and institutions at different levels.

Both visionaries and groups looking far into the future, contribute to the creation of a strong, secure society.

3For free distribution

Abraham Lincoln (1809 - 1865) is a former president of the United States of America. He worked hard to establish social security of millions of people who suffered as slaves by abolishing slavery in the USA. He directly opposed the spreading of slavery and denounced ''Free labour in free soil'' too. He is a prudent leader who established social security by being the emancipator of millions of slaves in 1863. ''Whatever you are be a good one'' is one of his famous sayings.

Abraham Lincoln

Explain in your own words what you 'Social Security' means.

Activity 1.1

1.1.3 Institutions that contribute towards the social security and services rendered

In any society there are a number of institutions that contribute to the establishment of the social security. Examples for some of them are given below:

Institutions that affect the social security

Family

School

Religious institutions

Social institutions

4For free distribution

1.1.3.1 The role played by the family towards social security

Happy family

Let us recall the lesson 'Our Family' we have learned for Civic Education in Grade 7. There, you had a chance to study more information about nature, tasks and the important role played by family. Accordingly, family renders a special task for the establishment of social security. The basic training of adjusting an individual to the society is given in the family. Discipline and accepted behaviours, activities, role models and attitudes among members in a family help create a responsible individual. The responsibility of a family is to provide a disciplined and cultured individual to society. Nutrition, security, love, compassion, mercy, kindness and models received by an individual, as a member of a family help produce confident, balanced individual to society. This ensures protection and security too. In living together as members of a family, common feelings are developed and they directly contribute to the social security too.

Developing healthy relationships among members Conducting healthy relationships with relatives and neighboursMaintaining healthy relationships with different individualsGuiding towards better socializationImproving qualities like love, compassion and kindnessEnsuring security and protectionPreventing use of alcohol, drugs and anti-social misconductsAdapting to protect some attributes of the cultureEncouraging listening to others and respecting their viewsProvision of necessary training to work in co-operation with each otherLeading through setting exampleDirecting to follow the instructions given by the elders towards personal welfare Encouraging self control and emotionsGuiding towards positive thinking about individuals and societyPreparing for a bearable, simple life styleExplaining the need to be law-abiding

Responsibilities of 'family' social security

5For free distribution

It is necessary to provide the background for individuals to complete with such qualities to be raised in each family. Then, social security is well established.

Given below is an example to revel how family can contribute to social security:

Thomas Alwa Edison who invented the light bulb (1841-1931)

As a small child, Thomas Alwa Edison, came home from school one day and handed over a letter to his mother. He said, “Mom, my teacher gave me this letter. She asked me to give it to you. She wanted only you to read it. What’s in this letter?”

She started reading the letter. Her eyes welled with tears as she read the letter. She read out aloud to her child…

“Your son is a genius. This school is too small for him and doesn’t have good enough teachers to train him. Please keep him at home and teach him yourself.” What was written in the letter was carried out as advised.

Many years later, after Edison’s mother had died, he became the greatest inventor of the century.One day he was going through an old trunk and, by chance, he came across the folded letter that his old teacher wrote to his Mother. He opened it…The message written in the letter was “Your son is a great fool. We cannot allow him to continue his studies in this school. Please keep him at home and teach him yourself.”

After reading the letter Edison became emotional and then wrote in his diary:“Thomas Alwa Edison was a great fool whose mother turned him into the genius of the century.”

1.1.3.2 The contribution from school towards social security

A school

From the family, children next step into school society. The school too shares equal responsibility like the family towards social security. School can be introduced as a well organized institution where the necessary background for the establishment of social security is widely organized. Knowledge, attitudes, skills and good discipline you achieved from the school help you a lot to live as a good citizen in the society.

6For free distribution

Provision of systematic educationProducing fair, social and well-disciplined individualsMaking perfect with competenciesProducing individuals with balanced personalityTeaching to fulfill duties while enjoying rightsTransferring and protection of cultureTeaching to work for the benefit of the societyExplaining the repercussions of the use of liquor and narcotics and abstaining from itMake to understand the ill-effects of the anti-social and misconduct activities and protecting from themCreation for better socializationPractising to evaluate equality and controlling emotionsDirecting to work collectively and peacefullyEstablishment of national harmony, brotherhood and equalityDeveloping of competencies necessary for the protection of the environmentDeveloping values relevant to the religion and ethicsMaking aware that every child is important and clever

Tasks fulfilled by the school towards the social security

Read the story given below about a teacher directing a student along the correct path.

Tim, admitted to Grade 1, showed lots of talents in many subjects. However, in the 2nd term of Grade 3, his teacher noticed a decline in his interests. The teacher observed him carefully and compared his continuous assessments during the previous year. The teacher was anxious to find the reason for Tim's decline in performances, which were good at the beginning. The teacher got closer to Tim and wanted to get to know him. She learnt that during the 1st term of Grade 3, Tim's mother fell ill and had died. The shock and the separation from his mother made Tim uncomfortable. He was frustrated.

Aware of the reason for Tim’s sudden decline in his work, the teacher became a mother to Tim. She showered him with love and affection coming from a mother. The teacher came to be a goddess, more or less. Tim picked up and showed enthusiasm with his studies again. The school became as pleasant place to him. At the end of the year, the teacher's table was filled with the presents brought by students. Tim honoured the teacher with a gift wrapped in a piece of paper. The present was a discolored bangle worn by Tim's mother. The teacher accepted it with great appreciation.

Time passed. Tim developed many talents while in primary and secondary school. He successfully completed University education too. The day of his marriage arrived. This grateful child did not forget his beloved teacher who was like his own mother. She came for his wedding wearing the bangle given by Tim, years ago.

7For free distribution

Present creatively the tasks fulfilled by your school for the establishment of social security.

Activity 1.2

1.1.3.3 Contributions from the religious places towards the social security

Religious places contribute immensely to build a peaceful society by establishing good habits and moral values. The primary objective of every religion is to make people aware of the importance of living co-operatively, harmoniously and unitedly as good citizens. Establishment of harmony among different religious and ethnic groups is also an important mission that must be performed by the religious institutions. Accordingly, religious institutions render an important mission for the establishment of social security. For that, some examples are given below:

Inculcating of good attitudesEstablishment of discipline and educationDriving towards spiritual developmentProducing virtuous citizensRescuing people from liquor and narcotics with sound advice regarding the harm doneEducating people about anti-social behaviour and damages caused as a result of involvement in such activities and preventing such acts.Raising awareness regarding co-operation and assistanceTeaching to use and protect customs and traditionsSetting of correct and positive vision about lifeExtending assistance to establish national harmony and national integrationWorking towards the sustainable peace

8For free distribution

Rev. Fr. Marceline Jayakody

Rev. Fr. Marceline Jayakody was a catholic priest, but he had a sound knowledge of Buddhism. Buddhist songs that he composed are very popular. He was called ''Priest in the temple'' because he worked hard to bring about unity among religions.

1. What are the different religious institutions found in your area?2. State five tasks rendered by these institutions in common towards social security.

Activity 1.3

1.1.3.4 Contribution from social institutions towards the social security

Individuals work in collaboration with social institutions and organizations to fulfill their various needs. People's needs have become complex and various institutions and organizations have emerged to fulfil these necessities. Some examples for such institutions are given below:

Student Councils

Children's Clubs

Elders' Society

Sports Clubs

Youth Councils

Village Development Societies

Farming Societies

Welfare Societies

Religious Societies

Trade Unions

Cooperative Societies

Funeral Welfare Societies

Social institutions and organizations

9For free distribution

Many of these organizations function based on a formal plan and a constitution. The main objective of them is also to get social welfare improved by working collaboratively with each other. Thus, social institutions and organizations established collectively in common render a massive service for ensuring social security. Several examples for their activities are given below;

Developing of unity among membersEstablishing of healthy inter-personal relationshipsPractising to respect and to accept others' opinionsRespecting the leadership and fulfilling duties of followersFulfillment of social duties and responsibilitiesBeing law abidinglyMaintaining of social welfare servicesAssisting the economic stabilityMaintaining of community health servicesConducting awareness programmes on food and nutritionAssisting to prevent epidemics and making people aware of getting protected from themImprovement of soft competencies (such as love, kindness, compassion, etc.)Assisting to establish national unity, national cohesion, and sustainable peaceGuiding to think positively about individuals and the societyConducting programmes to save the society from liquor, narcotics, anti social activities and misconductsHelping individuals in difficult situations such as in funerals

Tasks performed by various social institutions towards the social security

Collect the information about social institutions that function in your area and complete the following table.

Activity 1.4

Activities towards social securityObjectivesName of organization

10For free distribution

1.1.5 Liquor and usage of narcotics, anti-social activities and misconducts

Escalating of the use of liquor and narcotics is a main problem faced by the present society. Anti social and practices of misconduct also have increased as well. Various programmes are launched by the government to find solutions for them. Other than that, government institutions, various organizations and many non-governmental organizations too have launched various activities in this regard.

The use of liquor and drugs directly influences the increase of various anti-social activities and misconducts. It is a well-known fact that could be seen and heard through various mass media that use of liquor and narcotics has become the main factor, influencing the collapse of social security.

The task load performed by family, school, religious institutions and social institutions to prevent the use of liquor and drugs, anti social activities and misconducts is highly important for the society. There are many institutions training to eradicate or curtail such anti social activities for the establishment of social security.

Some examples for such organizations are shown below:

²National Board of Dangerous Drug Control ²Sri Lanka Police ²National Child Protection Authority ²Department of Probation and Child Care Services ²Liquor and Drug Information Centre ²Non governmental organizations such as Healthy Lanka, Sumithrayo, Mithuru Mithurio

1.1.6 Law for the social security

Introduction to law

System of all regulations imposed by the State to which all individuals of a country or society must obey can be simply introduced as law. Law is imposed for the prevention of unfavorable influences and damages occur in the society when an individual lives in the society, as well as to ensure peace and security.

Every society must be ruled according to the law in use. The fundamental responsibility of a government is to protect law and peace in its State. Citizens are expected to respond and act according to the law. When the law is violated, punishments are deserving. In every society where the authority of law is empowered well, justice, peace and social security are preserved.

11For free distribution

The duty fulfilled by the government organizations to establish social security is important. Court, Police and security forces can be cited as examples.

Enacted by government based on authorityControlling man's behaviour and activitiesViolation of law is a punishable offenceEnacting commonly, targeting the well-being of the society Changing, according to the changing of social needsActing with fair and equality for allMust be shown clearly and accuratelyActing about all (authority of law)Law is supreme. It stands above everyone. (Sovereignty of law)

Some attributes of law

Sources of law

Law has been enforced for social security and is based on various sources. Some examples are given below:

²Constitution ²Verdicts from courts ²Opinions of the scholars of law ²Religion

²Regulations and Acts ²Customs

Law is tightly bound with the social needs. This clearly shows, as obeying and following the law is compulsory to all. Law is practised in two ways:

1. Domestic law 2. International law

1. Domestic law

The law that is enacted and exercised pertaining within the territorial boundary of a country is called domestic law. Domestic law varies from country to country.

12For free distribution

The laws that are connected to the offences executed against the society by an individual or a group.

e.g. ²Murder and attempting to murder ²Plundering ²Raping ²Child abuse ²Kidnapping ²Disappearances ²Drug trafficking ²Robbery

The laws connected to the individuals in the society and offences or disputes and problems of properties.

e.g. ²Agreements ²Family connections (Divorces, guardianship of children) ²Heredity ²Ownership claims ²Land disputes ²Recovery of loans ²Compensations

The Supreme law which exercises the power of the State, including basic theories of State's administration is known as Constitutional Law. Through this, powers responsibilities and human rights of various areas are shown.

e.g. The constitution of 1978

Constitutional lawCriminal lawCivil law

Domestic law

2. International law

The law that is exercised when one country works with another country or several countries can be simply introduced as international law. Examples for such several international laws that exercise as international rules are given below;

²International human rights law ²Immigration and emigration law ²International laws connected to the flights ²International maritime law ²International environment law ²International investment law ²International problem - solving law

1.1.7 Various institutions which are set to empower the law

1. The court

The jurisdiction, protection of freedom and right of the people in a democratic country are attended to by the court. Working the court independently causes to build confidence and respect for the court in citizens.

13For free distribution

In Sri Lanka, there are several courts of justice to enforce proper jurisdiction.

Present Judicial system in Sri Lanka

Supreme court

Court of appeal

Provincial high court

High court

District court

Magistrate court

2. Sri Lanka police

Establishment of social security by protecting law and peace in the country is the main responsibility of the police. This is the speech presented by Samitha of Grade 9 on 'Sri Lanka Police' at the morning assembly of the school.

Dear teachers and my dear brothers and sisters,

“Dhammo Bhave Rakkathi Dammachari” The one who behaves according to the Dhamma will be protected by the Dhamma (Doctrine) itself. This is the motto of the Police. Today I am going to deliver a speech on Sri Lanka Police. The main institution that protects us day and night continuously is Police. It is a great service that the police do to live us without fear and suspicion from the moment we awake in the morning and to the moment we go to sleep at night and from the moment we sleep at night and to the moment we awake in the morning.

It is the police that protect us from thieves, robbers and criminals. Controlling traffic and helping pedestrians to cross roads are a very common sight in urban areas. Provision of traffic warden training to students like us is also a great help rendered by the police.

Provision of security to VIPs, various functions and meetings, guidance with careful driving could be introduced as special services rendered by the police for us.

Official symbol of Sri Lanka Police

14For free distribution

Some main functions of police are to curtail anti social activities like liquor, narcotics, arrest culprits and bring them into the strong arm of the law. Preventing various disputes, conflicts and terrorist activities are also an important mission of the police. Police executes all these for the purpose of ensuring our security. Ensuring the protection of children like us and women by conducting separate units for them is a factor to be happy about.

The services rendered by the police in natural disasters like flood and earth slips are unforgettable. Further, it must be mentioned here that, the efficient performance of the police to take threatening criminals into custody within a short period of time. There, the functions performed by the police kennel service also must be commended.

Furthermore, the police executes a great service by acting rapidly on sudden disasters and sudden accidents by conducting the 119 service.

We should always respect the police for the services they render towards our motherland and ourselves at all times of the day, be it sunshine or rain or day and night. As well, it is our responsibility to help the Police always with our assistance to continue their duties successfully. I mentioned only a small section of the massive services rendered by the police for the social security.

Thank you for listening.

A Retired Director General of Police, A.J. Iddamalgoda, defines the word POLICE as follows; P - Polite O - Obedient L - Loyal I - Intelligent C - Courageous E - Efficient

Whenever it is necessary to establish social security, the Sri Lanka Police can seek the assistance of the International Police.

15For free distribution

An incident related to the Police in the United Kingdom

Hyde Park Corner in the United Kingdom is a place where people gather freely during week ends. Some enjoy by dancing, singing, participating in carnivals, delivering public speeches. One day, a person driving his vehicle near Hyde Park Corner heard a man delivering a public speech abusing the Police in the United Kingdom as low, mean, corrupted and fraudulent. The person in the vehicle slowed down the speed to listen to the speech. Suddenly, he saw a giant policeman speedily making his way towards his vehicle. He got alarmed thinking that he would be taken offence. The police man came closer to the vehicle, and said ''Please switch off the engine of your vehicle, people cannot hear the speech well because of the noise from your vehicle.''

List out the duties performed by the Police referring to Samitha's speech. Eg - Ensuring peace and public security

Activity 1.5

3. Attorney General’s Department

The Attorney General’s Department holds the responsibility for all legal activities of the government. Prosecutions and appearances in cases on behalf of the government are conducted by this department. The Attorney General who is the chief legal officer of Sri Lanka is the head of this department. The Attorney General is appointed by the President with the recommendation of the constitution.

Several Tasks performed by the Attorney General’s Department are given below;

²Provision of necessary legal advice in the lawsuits connected to the government ²Compiling of all legal activities to the government or against the government ²Appearing for the lawsuits connected to the government or State institutions ²Providing proper legal advice to the Acts to be submitted to the Parliament ²Participation as a partner in the lawsuits prosecuted by the Supreme Court ²Provisions of necessary recommendations to the President to execute the death penalty which had been committed on a culprit.

16For free distribution

4. Government Analyst’s Department

Analytical and specialist advisory services connected to the fields like forensic science, food science for courts, law imposing institutions and other institutions are provided by the Government Analyst’s Department.

While “Building of a just and a law abiding society” is the vision of the Government Analyst’s Department, contribution to the jurisdiction efficiently and in a justifiable manner is the basic objective. This department possesses the specialists to examine and to provide the analytical reports on samples produced by various institutions. There are many institutions that work in collaboration with the Government Analyst’s Department for the establishment of social security. Some of them are shown below;

²Labour Tribunals ²Department of Criminal Investigation ²Department of Customs ²Excise Department ²Sri Lanka Tea Board

²Court of Law ²The Police Department ²Health Department ²Sri Lanka Standard Institute ²Central Environmental Authority 5. Department of Prison

The main functions of the Prisons Department are to imprison various wrongdoers condemned by the law and committed to prison, rehabilitate and release them to society as just and peaceful citizens with human values. In addition, the Prisons Department is responsible to keep in custody, those suspected of crimes, looking after and maintaining them. Researches reveal that a larger percentage of people sent to prison have not successfully completed school education.

6. Security Forces in Sri Lanka

The security forces deserve an important place as the man institution that acts to establish social security. To ensure social security, Army, Navy and Air force have been established under the Ministry of Defense.

Given below are three articles regarding each of these forces published in a wall-paper by three groups of Grade 9 students.

17For free distribution

Sri Lanka Army

After the independence, Ceylon Army was established on 10th October, 1949. Ceylon Army was renamed as ‘Sri Lanka Army’ in 1972. Provision of security to the nation on land is the main task of the Army. Sri Lanka Army that serves under the motto, “For the Fatherland” is always on alert both in day and night for the protection of motherland. The Army is dedicated to protect the land from various military situations that affect both locally as well as internationally.

Sri Lanka Navy

Ceylon Navy was established on 09th December, 1950. It is known as Sri Lanka Navy since 1972. ''The Golden fence around the country'' is the motto of the Navy. The main task of the Navy is to protect the motherland from the military threats or outside. Sri Lanka Navy that works hard fighting with the mighty ocean provides the protection from the land as well as from the sea. Working for the prevention of illegal trading activities like drugs and illegal immigration that occur along the sea routes are also important tasks rendered by the Navy. The prevention of illegal fishing that is conducted, violating the territorial sea limits, is also an important service of the Navy. Here it must be appreciated the services rendered by Sri Lanka Navy in supplying transportation among islands, helping in disaster situations and rescuing the people caught in flood, etc.

18For free distribution

Sri Lanka Air Force

Ceylon Air Force was established on 02nd March, 1951. It was renamed as “Sri Lanka Air Force” since 1972. ‘Protect Lanka skies (Surakimu Lakambara/''C»[øP Áõß£µ¨ø£¨ £õxPõ¨÷£õ®'') is the motto of the Air Force. Protecting the motherland from the sky while piercing the whole sky of the country is the main task of the Sri Lanka Air Force. Except the protection of the motherland from the threats levelling from local as well as international warfare, conducting domestic flights are also an important service of the Air Force. Provision of aid, saving lives and provision of security, in the disasters reaching the locations that can be reached by neither on land nor water are another important services rendered by the Sri Lanka Air Force.

Apart from that, the Civil Security Force too renders an important national service to establish social security by helping the three Forces.

The three forces in Sri Lanka render a dignified service to the country and the nation. The main responsibility of the forces is the safeguarding of unitary and territorial integrity of Sri Lanka. The three forces render a special task to the motherland while preventing various accidents, hazards and establishing social security by protecting land, sea and sky.

Examples for several tasks rendered by the security forces for the strengthening of security commonly are given below;

²Protecting the country from threatening situations related to war both locally or internationally ²Acting to subdue insurrection, fights and terrorist activities ²Assisting the police to protect physical and human resources in Sri Lanka ²Providing relief services with sudden hazards and disasters ²Assisting with maintain compulsory service on the situations like sudden strikes, etc. ²Assisting the provision of daily needs for the displaced people on various reasons. ²Assisting the government when it is needed to perform tasks of national value.

19For free distribution

Sing and enjoy the song given below written on behalf of the services rendered by three forces;

rka u,la f,i foõ nUqka foda;ska msÿ fï mska ìfï mia ms`vla .s,syS fkdhkakg rka jegla we; isõ fldfkafk;a mqrd tl ySkfha uq¿ f,dalhd ksokd /fhafoaYfha uqr foaj;d t<s ? mqrd oe,a ù ;sfha

f,ys fydjd jevq ish mq;=ka we; wú ord jeo rK u;skamE úl=ï oel oE ne;ska ysi w;a uqÿka fo;s mshjreka uõ ìfï ysñlï m;d ;u Èú msÿ l, ta mq;=ka;=ka fyf,a yeu uõjreka ,h lsß tÍ we; Wka kñka

rka u,la f,i'''''''''

uõ l=iska fkdj ñys l=iska isß,l Wmka úre orejfkawms Tfnka kj mK ,nd fuys h<s Wmkafkuq wo ÈfkakEishka fidhqrka Tfí wo ÿ mq;=ka yeu fï ìfïyoj;ska wms hqoìfuys Tn ;ks lf,a ke; lsis Èfka$$$

mo rpkh (¡ l=-udrodi imq;ka;%S .dhkh(¡ iqks,a tÈßisxy

This is the English paraphrase of the above sinhala song;

There is a golden fence around this meritorious land, that was offered like a golden flower holding in the cupped hand by the gods, without letting even a lump of soil to get fall apart. While the whole world asleep in one dream, the divine light of the guarding gods of the land are burning throughout the night.

The sons who were brought up by holding at the bosom are now in the battle field armed with weapons. Fathers, seeing the deeds of bravery committed by them in battle fields intoxicated with moral and belligerent, honour them by keeping the hands on their heads. When they sacrifice their lives for the sake of motherland, breast of every mother in three parts of the island is welled with milk in their names.

Hail, Heroic boys! We have reborn here today by receiving a new lease of life from you as you were born not from mother’s womb but from the womb of the mother earth of Sri Lanka. You are never been isolated in the battle field as all your relatives, brothers, sons and daughters are with you in the battle fields in their hearts.

20For free distribution

Given below is a Tamil song which gives a similar meaning;

Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷ÁAøÇUQß÷Óß EßøÚ {®©v÷¯ {®©v÷¯ & |õß ÷|]UQß÷Óß EßøÚ (Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á)Põ»[PÍõ÷» öußÓÀ Á¸P!¦¯÷» Áµ÷Áshõ®!÷©P[PÍõ÷» ©øÇ÷¯ Á¸P!öÁÒÍ® Áµ÷Áshõ®!ÃkPÒ ÷uõÖ® JÎ÷¯ Á¸P!C¸÷Í Áµ÷Áshõ®!|õkPÒ ÷uõÖ® EÓ÷Á Á¸P!£øP÷¯ Áµ÷Áshõ®!\©õuõÚ÷© \©õuõÚ÷©, ,uÊÄQß÷Óß EßøÚ,uº© ÷uÁ÷Ú uº© ÷uÁ÷Ú,\µnøh¢÷uß EßøÚ, (Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á)¦zuß ÁÈ°À A÷\õPß ÷\øÁ,¦›¢ux GuØPõP?¦ßÚøP •P÷© ÷uÁÛß ÃöhÚ,ö\õßÚx GuØPõP?\zv¯ ö|Ôø¯ uõµoö¯[S®,u¢ux GuØPõP\©õuõÚ©õ® \©õuõÚ©õ®uõ÷¯ EÚUPõP! (Aø©v¨ ¦Óõ÷Á) &PÂbº Psnuõ\ß

Prepare a booklet including the informations about one of the institutions that establishes the social security.

Activity 1.6

21For free distribution

1.2 Responsibilities and duties of the individuals towards the social security

The main responsibility of establishing social security is assigned to the individual. Accordingly, there are a number of duties must be fulfilled by the individual to the society for the establishment of social security. There, performing one's duties well when working with various institutions that have been established for the establishment of social security is the responsibility of every individual.

1.2.1 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the constitution and other rules and regulations

Constitution is the fundamental law of the country. It is known as the supreme law too. Except the constitutions, criminal law, civil law and other Acts and orders are active for the establishment of social security. When they are functioning it is compulsory to act adjusting them, respecting and obeying them.

The following is a part of a discussion occurred among a group of students of Grade 9, regarding the duties and responsibilities of people on the constitution and other rules and regulations.

Being bound to act according to the constitution is a responsibility and duty of all

Obeying to other rules and regulations too is our obligation and responsibility

Getting a good knowledge about the constitution and rules and regulations is a responsibility of citizens.

Rizana

Uma

Disna

Samaka

Consolidation and systematization of the administration of the country and protection of rights occur due to the obedience to the rules and regulations.

22For free distribution

Unawareness of the law is not a reason for excuse

It is important to know about the punishment that is deserved when law is violated.

There is no change in the due punishment even though the law is not known.

Making others aware of the rules and regulations that we know already is our duty.

Isura

Rukshan

Ravi

Reka

1.2.2 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the judiciary

Among the mechanisms to establish social security, judiciary is also very important. Judiciary is the one that determines jurisdiction in a country.

Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the judiciary

Avoiding from the activities that disparage the court

Building confidence about the court process without distributing judicial forces

Respecting the judges

Respecting the court

Obeying the court process

Protecting the respect of the court

1.2.3 Responsibilities and duties of individuals related to the Police

Police renders a valuable service to ensure the social security. On behalf of that we too, as individuals, possess a number of responsibilities and duties to be fulfilled. Several examples for that are given below:

23For free distribution

Showing obedience relevant to the practice of law

Assisting to maintain peace and protection

Making the police informed whenever peace is violated

Assisting the police to capture criminals

Assisting the police for criminal investigation

Protecting State and public properties

Provision of true and correct informationwhen necessary

Not disturbing in subduing the sudden illegal riots and rallies of the public

Assisting the police to prevent liquor, the use of drugs and other anti social activities

Protecting the discipline on road

Column one (I) of the following table shows a few tasks performed by the police for the establishment of social security. Write several duties can be fulfilled by yourself as a citizen, to make them a success in column (II) given in the table.

Activity 1.7

Column I Tasks performed by the policeColumn IIDuties can be fulfilled by the citizensRoad safetyElimination of drugsControl of plagues like dengueEnvironmental conservation

24For free distribution

1.2.4 Duties and responsibilities of individuals related to the security forces

The security forces render several massive services for the social security. Due to the fulfilment of their services, they have been subjected to the frequent honour as the guardian deities of the land. When security forces fulfil their duties, we too, as individuals, possess a bundle of duties and responsibilities to be fulfilled towards the security forces.

The following diagram shows some examples for them;

Evaluating the service performed by the security forces keeping life at stake

Informing security forces about the situations like riots and commotions

Not disturbing the activities of controlling riots

Assisting the activities conducted by security forces to safe guard peace and security

Assisting the relief services in disasters

Contribution as much as possible for the welfare activities of the war - heroes

Acting sensitively about the dead or disabled war - heroes

1.2.5 Responsibilities and duties of people relevant to the Conciliation Board

Under this system, attempts have been taken to solve problems that occur trivial among the public without going to the court. It is also expected to reduce the huge accumulation of cases in the courts.

The system that exists for the conciliation in Sri Lanka has been introduced by the Act no 72 of Conciliation Board Act of 1998.

The panel for Conciliation Board is appointed by the Conciliation Board Commission. Educated, intelligent and virtuous individuals accepted by the society are appointed as panel members.

There are three ways of filing a case in a Conciliation Board:

1. Through the Police2. Through the Court3. Filing a case privately

To make the service rendered by the Conciliation Board a success, duties and responsibilities of individuals connected to it too must be fulfilled. They could be lined up as follows:

25For free distribution

Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to Conciliation BoardsBuilding the conciliation through the agreement built through Conciliation Board

Always acting with conciliators through healthy communication without being emotional

Being aware of the correct process of lodging a dispute at Conciliation Board

Protecting the respect of conciliators and other parties

Seeking the assistance of Conciliation Board to get trivial disputes solved

Showing obedience towards the Conciliation Board when disputes get solved

1.2.6 Responsibilities and duties of individuals connected to the National Child Protection Authority

National Child Protection Authority was established by Act No 50 of 1998 of the Parliament. It has been established with the objectives of prevention of child abuse and supplying the protection and treatments for victims who were subjected to such abuse.

Vision

To create a friendly and protective environment for children

Mission

To ensure that children are free from all forms of abuse

The main services rendered by National Child Protection Authority are,

²Maintaining a direct telephone line (1929) to inform about violence against children and child abuse ²Immediate intervention if a violation of child right, relevant to the child Right Act ²Legal intervention relevant to the child abuse ²Conducting educational exhibitions and awareness programmes ²Provision of psycho – social services to the victims ²Tsunami Foster – parent programme ²Special police investigations

National Child Protection Authority plays a massive role in providing above services for the children. When social security is established through them, a bundle of responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to them exists.

26For free distribution

Taking measures to protect child rights

To participate in educational exhibitions and awareness programmes

Provision of information for the activities at all investigations relevant to child abuse and criminal cases

Informing about the violation of child rights to National Child Protection Authority

Tending to receive the services of National Child Protection Authority

Following all rules and regulations connected to the children

Assisting the activities of National Child Protection Authority

Ways to help National Child Protection Authority

We can extend our assistance to the contribution of the National Child Protection Authority for the establishment of social security through fulfilling above mentioned responsibilities and duties.

1.2.7 Responsibilities and duties of individuals relevant to the Human Rights Commission

27For free distribution

Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka has been established for the protection of human rights by No 21 Act of 1996.

This commission renders a great service for the establishment of social security through the protection of human rights. When these tasks are performed, we, as individuals, possess responsibilities and duties connected to the commission. Few of them are shown below;

²Complaining about the violation of human rights. ²Showing obedience and respect for the recommendations of Human Rights Commission ²To participate in Human Rights promotional programmes ²Assisting activities of the Commission by providing necessary and correct information ²Fulfillment of duties connected to the human rights

Several institutions that are formed for the establishment of social security are given in the column I in the table. State your duties relevant to them in column II

Activity 1.8

Column I Institutions which are active for the social security

2. Security Forces

3. Conciliation Board

1. Court

4. National Child Protection Authority

5. Human Rights Commission

Column II Duties to be fulfilled by us

28For free distribution

Summary

²There is an inseparable mutual relationship between the individual and the society

²Ensuring the social protection and co-existence at the maximum level is social security

²Among the institutions that contribute for the establishment of social security family, school, religious institutions and social institutions are important.

²The constitution and various rules and regulations are established for the social security.

²Court, Police, Security forces, Conciliation Board, National Child Protection Authority, Human Rights Commission and several other institutions are established for the social security in Sri Lanka.

²There are obligations of citizens for the organizations that work to establish social security.

²For ensuring of social security, fulfilment of obligations and correct mechanisms are important.

²Correct establishment of social security at due level is important for the national development as for the well as sustainable peace.

29For free distribution

Introduction

Due to the development of science and as a result of various researches and explorations new inventions have emerged. Accordingly, man is persuaded to produce technical equipments in order to ease his needs. Technology is needed to man to make his work easier. Several changes have been executed in different fields of economy by technology. They may affect human life in an unfavorable manner as well as in a favorable manner. Therefore, being aware of these timely changes is a must.

By Studying this chapter that discusses about the contemporary changes, the following competencies can be developed;

²Technology ²New technical tools ²Ways how technology affects human life favourably and unfavourably. ²Importance of the adaptation of appropriate technology ²Contemporary changes occur in the economy ²To work according to such changes ²Job market and its trends ²Qualifications that should be completed for new employments ²Necessity of a proper life-style with co-existance and well-being when working with competitive world ²Co-operative Movement, its tasks and services ²Develop competencies to act as a member of the global village by protecting localism and adhering to the contemporary changes

ContemporaryChanges 02

30For free distribution

2.1 Changes in technology and responding to them

2.1.1 Introduction to technology

Man has been using various techniques to make his work easy. He had a motivation for it by birth. Accordingly, the methodology man utilizes to make his work easier can be simply introduced as Technology.

2.1.2 Changes in technology

With the down fall of feudalism, man tends to use books. It directly influenced to develop the thinking power of man. As a result of that, science and technology began to develop systematically. It is a pleasurable factor that the world is gifted with new inventions in parallel to that. Technological changes means the changes of methodologies that are used to make human need easier.

Man who lived in hunting era used stone tools to fulfill his activities. But later they developed systematically. Life of the past man was simple. So, he used a natural cave which was a wonderful creation of nature itself as his shelter. But with the development occurred with new inventions and technology he had to change systematically. As a result of that, man who lived in a cave, has made high luxury mansions which have been built using the most latest methods at present as his habitat.

A cave

Latest upstair HouseNormal houseWattle and daub hut

A Tent

Methodical change took place with the technology

With the development of technology, human needs too have become complex. The result of it, was the endowment of more electronic equipment to the world in place of old stone tools. This could be easily understood when we compare the equipment that have been used in the past kitchen with the present kitchen.

31For free distribution

Kitchen of a modern house

Kitchen of an old house

2.1.3 New Inventions through explorations and researches

With the gradual development of population, human needs also developed. Need for efficient tools arised to get these needs fulfilled. As a result of the industrial revolution that took place parallel to it in 18th century endowed more new inventions to the world. It is not a secret that, explorations and researches conducted then were a great boon to it. The study that is conducted to find some solutions to a problem following scientific methods is a research. Exploration and researches fulfill a specific task in present day world. Accordingly, human needs too have been widened. Need arised for modified tools to fulfill them. It is more apt to introduce this as the most powerful factor that influenced to the origin of technical productions.

2.1.4 Social changes that occur with the changes of technology

According to the studies conducted from past to present it is clear that several changes have occurred in technology. Due to these changes, more changes have occurred in various fields of the society too. Several changes that occurred in the society are shown below;

²Change of the consumer pattern of man

²Origin of more new employments

²Origin of new styles

²Origin of the methods of modern medical treatments

²Change in the production and usage of food and beverages

²Change in the ways of spending leisure and recreation

²Expansion of social relationships and acceleration of them

²Declining of ancient traditional methodologies

²Change of the thoughts and wishes of people

32For free distribution

²Favourable and unfavourable effects caused the technical changes Though the technical changes are needed, there are favourable and unfavourable effects due to the excessive use of it in compulsory manner by man.

Favourable effects

²Works becoming easy ²Saving time ²Minimizing the wastage of resources

Unfavourable effects

²Human needs become complex ²Adaptation of man to unnecessary consuming pattern ²Mechanisation of people ²Society become complex ²Acceleration of environmental pollution ²Man subjecting to different diseases ²Collapse of social relations

²Increase of productivity ²Increase of efficiency ²Expansion of human and social relations

2.1.5 Importance of utilization of technical changes as a creative citizen

Results that can be achieved by utilizing the technology for the benefits of man are immense. The below mentioned saying makes us understand that the utilization of technology in creative manner for different activities is apt.

The nation that doesn't build new things doesn't rise Kumarathunga Munidasa

The above sentence shows that technology is necessary and it must be utilized creatively. Kumarathunga Munidasa emphasizes that individual and social development can be dawned through it.

33For free distribution

Some instance the technology is used today are given below:

²For various domestic needs ²For multi-service necessities. (education, transportation, communication, hygienic) ²For leisure and recreational activities ²For the building up social relations ²For the creation of new inventions ²For the acceleration of production efficiency

2.1.6 Appropriate technology

Appropriate technology is using technology to suit the social, economic, cultural and environmental conditions of the country. Using machinery to maximize the use of human labour in a country where human labour is in abundance can be cited as example. There are two important things that should be focused in using technology; advancing towards industrialization, preserving traditional industries and expanding technical needs bearable to the country.

2.1.7 Benefits of using appropriate technology to establish sustainable development

Sustainable development means long-lasting and endurable development. Development that is conducted without destroying the resources that are necessary for the needs of future generations while resources are used for the present day activities without damaging the environment is called sustainable development. The development process should get the maximum benefit of resources while avoiding wastage of resources.

Given below are some benefits of using appropriate technology for sustainable development:

²Avoiding wastage of resources ²Ability to take maximum use of labour resources ²Minimizing environmental pollution ²Ability to maintain a balanced environment ²Bearable for the economy of country

34For free distribution

Technical equipmentUses A1 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''2 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''B1 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''2 ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

2. Facebook, Instergram, Linkedin are some of the social networks that are famous today. Personal relationships are widened by these. There are social welfare activities conducted by social media such as; educational programmes, tree planting programmes, helping kidney patients, building houses. There are some adverse effects of this social media too. Mention two such instances and two ways of avoiding them.

3. State unfavourable effects that have occurred with the change of technology.

4. Suggest actions that can be used to minimize them.

5. Explain briefly the importance of new inventions when fulfilling day to day activities.

Activity 2.1

1. Complete the following table by identifying the technical equipment used at your home.

2.2 Adaptation to the changes in economy

2.2.1 Economical changes with technology

Resources in the environment are used to fulfill the unlimited and complex needs of man. These resources exist very limited in the environment. Man has been persuaded to produce goods and services using these limited resources to fulfill his needs since the ancient times. Accordingly, the three main processes that occur in an economy of any country can be identified as:

²Production ²Distribution ²Consumption

35For free distribution

Production means changing economical resources to fufill the needs of human. Conversion of existing resources into goods that are compatible with human needs using labour and techniques takes place in the process of production. The main process that takes place there is the conversion of raw materials into finished products. The process of providing manufactured goods and services up to the consumer is distribution. Transportation is a compulsory factor for it. Fulfillment of human needs by using goods and services produced in an economy is consumption. Above mentioned three processes are compulsory for the existence of an economy.

The changes that take place in an economy can be considered under three sections:

Changes take place in an economy

Agricultural sector

Industrial sector

Service sector

2.2.1.1 Contemporary changes take place in the agricultural sector

Sri Lanka is a country which has made agriculture as its livelihood since past. There the paddy cultivation as muddy-cultivation (Mada Govithana) received a prominent place. Chena cultivation as land cultivation (Goda Govithana) also was popular. Apart from that the agricultural sector consists of the cultivations like vegetables, fruits, tubers, cereals and spices too.

With the arrival of the Westerners, plantation began to be popular in Sri Lanka. There, Tea, Rubber and Coconut occupied a special place as commercial crops. But they existed as primary productions. With the speedy development of the technology, a noted development could be seen in the local agricultural sector too. At present, more modern changes has taken place in association with this could be seen:

Examples - ²Use of machinery for preparation of land, planting, harvesting, etc ²Use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides ²Introduction of hybrid seeds and tissue-culture plant varieties to get short-term harvests ²Use of gene technology ²Utilization of new methods in irrigation ²Use of modern methods of cultivations and greenhouse cultivation ²Diversification of productions

36For free distribution

Use of modern technology in agriculture

Preparation of landPlantingHarvesting

Use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides are used in agriculture

Use of fertilizerUse of pesticides

Use of modern irrigational methods

Drip irrigation

Modern methods of cultivation

HydrophonicsA Green house

37For free distribution

Diversification of tea productions

Organic Tea(Liquid Tea)

Green Tea

Tea bags

Black Tea

Packed in boxes

Instant Tea

2.2.1.2 Changes occur in the industrial sector

The results of modern technical inventions have been used mostly for the development in the field of industry. Because of this, products which were given great efforts to produce can be produced today at a lower time with greater quality with the use of developed machinery.

Results of them are:

²Existence of division of labour and specification ²Origin of assembling industry ²Origin of high – technical industry ²Employing robot technology in the process of production ²Use of electronic and nano technologies ²Production of machineries and accessories necessary for explorations and researches (satellites and space crafts)

Due to this, a rapid development took place in such sectors.

38For free distribution

Vehicle assembling industry

Transparent solar panels that can be used as house windows

Nano scale robotics used in industry (Enlarged image)

2.2.1.3 Changes occur in service sector

At present, the service sector occupies a special place in an economy. Services are supplied at different levels from the production of goods up to consumption of them. Here, services are provided with different fields like education, health, banking, insurance, transport and trade. In the supply of such services, use of technology and its changes have occurred immensely.

39For free distribution

How Education is influenced by technology

Sand Board

Slate

Over Head Projector

Multi-media Projector

Minoli - In the past, children in the village received education from the educated elderly persons of the village. It was called 'Guru Gedara' Later the education was given in temples and Pirivens. The writing on Veli Pella (Sand Board) was commonly used. After that it was changed into slate.

Pavithra - The formal schools in Sri Lanka were established during the period of Europeans. The main items used in the school were black board and chalk.

Pabasara - Now look at our school. How many facilities are there to learn? The modern equipment like radio, television, overhead projector, multimedia projector and computers have become a massive strength to us in education. haven't they?

Azfak - Use of technology in education has become a major part at present. we have received a possibility of learning courses in other countries in the world through the internet.

kalindu - Latest introduction is 'e-learning'

supuni - Not only that, more facilities have been offered at present by various explorations and researches in education. I feel that the rapid development in technology is the main cause for this.

40For free distribution

Health

Health service too has been widened with modern technology. The fields like diagnosis of diseases, treatments, production of pharmaceuticals, etc. have experienced a rapid development. Medical equipment that can be used to perform even very complex operations more easily have been invented. Due to the abundance of X-ray machines, CT scanner machines, etc. which are necessary to examine the patients, provision of services in the field of health has reached a higher level.

Scanning machines

Banking

Banking services conducts transactions in day to day activities of man more easily. Possibility of depositing one's money safety as well as withdrawing them back when needed has been provided through this. At present, the possibility of carrying transactions, using teller cards and without collecting money here and there, has been dawned. By the introduction of Automated Teller Machines, an extra safety is provided for money. Services can be easily fulfilled, locally and internationally, through e-banking system. As well, by using modern technical equipment, money counting, forge currency, forge cheques and forge signatures can be identified.

41For free distribution

Development of transportation through technology

Caravan

Modern motor car

Passenger ship

Air craft

Modern bus

Express train

Nikil - At the early age, people went their journeys on foot. Later, animals were used. With the invention of wheel, people were motivated to use different types of vehicles. It has developed up to the most sophisticated vehicles at present.

Nimasha - Transportation occurs in several modes: they occur on land, on water and in air. Super-luxury liner ships as well as aeroplanes can be seen.

Hansintha - Not only that. The aeroplanes with large number of passengers on board and also with thousands of kilos of cargo fly in the sky very lightly. When we see how the ships are loaded with thousands of container boxes sail on the sea, feel amazed as well.

Harsha - At present, various modern methods are used in cargo transportation as well as in passenger transport.

Ashen - Is there a big service done in passenger transport by busses, isn't it? As well as, long flight aeroplanes, driverless vehicles and eco friendly vehicles too are popular now.

Dayal - Railway transport in the world is very popular. As well as the passenger railways, the railways that transport goods too render a massive service. See, how marvelous the development of technology utilized, for the benefit of man?

42For free distribution

Effect of technological development to communication

Tharindu - Do you know that in the past people ''hooted'' to send a message to a distant person? Then the one in the distance, understanding the messages returned an answer by hooting

Avishka - Not only that. I have heard that people in the past setting bonfire, sending drum-beaters, shooting the ola-leaves on which massage is written and using bows and arrows were also messages.

Pathum - Today we are more developed, friend! Now we can do all of them through mobile phone

Viran - As you shout so much, tell us that who invented telephone

Pathum - Oh…. It is simple. I have heard Alexander Graham Bell.

Avishka - Pathum is very clever, isn't he?

Tharindu - Yes, it is true, he reads a lot. By the way, do you know that cable telephones, cable less telephones as well as mobile phones with more facilities are used at any amount?

Layanthma - Why? Telemail, express mails too are available now.

Ashan - That means, the communication has developed even beyond our imagination. Anyone in the world can be contact within several seconds using internet, satellite technology, skype, viber, blogs etc.

Telephone developed by Alexander Graham Bell - 1875

Telephone

Sending messages via-birds

Setting bonfire

Fax machine

Use of satellite

Modern mobile phone

43For free distribution

2.2.2 The influence on individual and society from the various changes occur in the economy

We have identified that many changes have taken place in the economy due to all the factors mentioned above. These changes create different influences towards individual and society.

Some examples given below:

²Individuals addicting to unfavorable consuming pattern ²Tending to a life pattern that does not withstand with economy ²Getting used to wrong behavioural patterns ²Urbanization ²Environmental pollution ²Mechanization ²Occurrence of mental depressions ²Occurrence of diseases that cannot be diagnosed

Due to this, though whatever changes occur in the economy, we must be conscious to adapt to these contemporary changes in appropriate way. There,

²Identifying one's needs and use of appropriate technology accordingly ²Not becoming a slave to technology ²Apt adaptation to the changes take place in the economy

1. Name environmental problems that have erupted with the modern technology found in your area.2. State your suggestions to minimize those problems.3. Introduce what is "appropriate technology' and explain why it is more important for present.

Exercise 2.2

44For free distribution

2.3 New Trends bound with Job Market

2.3.1 Identifying new trends bound with job market

All the employment opportunities available in the society are called the world of work. The demand for the employment opportunities available in the world of work and suitable supply for it can be simply defined as "Job Market". Chances for employments in present day world are in abundance. But, lack of skilled workers for these job opportunities has become an acute problem faced by many countries in the world. Because of this, identifying job opportunities available in the job market is important. Meanwhile, continuous awareness about the timely trends present in the job market is a must. As well, completing the necessary qualifications for them is also compulsory.

Many jobs have emerged in different fields of the present society. They can be shown classified as follow;

²Recycling non bio degradable waste ²Jobs related to the management of bio-degradable and non bio-degradable waste ²Food processors ²Agricultural Research Officer ²Breeding Researcher ²Technical Officer

Agriculture sector

²Suppliers of items for functions ²Suppliers of sound system accessories ²Legal advisors ²Interior decorations

Service sector

²Electronic technicians ²Drone cameramen ²Robot technicians ²Nano technicians ²Computer technicians ²Software developers

Industrial sector

Recently, completion of different extra qualifications has become a compulsory factor in the job market.

With the contemporary changes, the demand prevails in the job market for various jobs too has changed. Factors that have influenced for it are shown below:

²Human needs being complex ²Gradual increase of the crowd receiving education

45For free distribution

²Arrival of various machineries in the place of human labour ²Growth of labour force with the growth of population

When the attention is focused on present job market, it becomes clear that it consists of two main sections:

²Local job market ²Foreign job market

By today, a very competitive job market has been created for both local as well as foreign sections. Therefore, it is important, to accomplish relevant educational and vocational qualifications from the schooling age itself.

2.3.2 Employments that are open through new trends

There are many modern employments that have emerged under the influence of new trends in the job market. The following are some examples for them:

²Data processors ²Software engineers ²Horticulture technicians ²Genetic engineers ²Fashion modelers ²Graphic designers ²Translators

²Flower cultivators ²Architects ²Ornamental fish breeders ²Media men ²Function organizers ²Data Analysts ²Counsellors

It can be noticed that the job opportunities in the world of work has been expanded with the advancement of technology. Being aware of this is important to enter the job market in future.It is important to focus on the following in completion of qualifications for job market with new friends:

²Training on new technical equipments ²Knowledge on computer ²Willingness to be trained further ²Dedication to provide the service in additional time ²Flexibility ²Fluency in many languages (Eg - English, Tamil, Chinese, Russian, Spanish, Korean, Japanese, French, etc.)

46For free distribution

Activity 2.3

1. Find and name the new employment opportunities emerged with the change in the technology in the field of agriculture, industrial and service using newspapers or internet.2. Now you are a student of Grade 9 but in future you too will have to step into the job market. Name the employment you hope to engage in and briefly describe the service rendered by it for both you and country as well.3. Prepare a booklet on "Nano Technology" which is the latest revolution in the technology.

2.4 Acting in co-existence in competitive world while promoting well-being

2.4.1 Well-being

“Living righteously is well-being” Or else, leading a righteous life earning wealth in legal means without disturbing others is well-being. You might have read the poem “Sirimath” contained in the first book of “Shiksha Marga” composed by Munidasa Kumarathunga, who is a doyen of Sinhalese writing. Following are some poems cited from it. Sing this all together.

jeäysáhka yg okajd ksis fldg lghq;= lrkg leu;s h yeu úg

fid| foa is;=u;a is;= foa lSu;a lS foa lereu;a fkdyÍ isßu;a

isßu;a uf. ilshym;a <ufhls kqjK;a we;af;ls jevg;a iuf;ls

Woh u mqnq§ uqyqKg Èh § l=, foú ku§ f.a fÞr wu§

mdvï lrkg m; fmd; f.k isg is; fjk foh lg fkdyÍ lsis úgYslaId ud¾. - m<uqjk fmd;

47For free distribution

Given below is the English paraphrase of the above Sinhala song;

Sirimath is a virtuous boy. He is intelligent and clever.

He gets up early in the morning. After washing his face He worships his parents. He sweeps the house.

When he takes books to study does not send his attention away on unnecessary things.

He always likes to do any work after informing elders.

Sirimath does not hesitate to think good things to say what he thinks and to do what he has said.

First Book – Shiksha Margaya

Given below is the paraphrase of the above poem in Tamil Language;

]Uåõ ©õºP (÷£õuÚõ ÁÈ) •u»õ® £õP®

]›©z Gß |s£ß|À»öuõ¸ ]ÖÁßAÔÄ® Eøh¯ÁßBØÓ¾® Eøh¯Áß

AvPõø»°À GÊ¢x £Àx»UQ •P® PÊÂS»öu´Ázøu Án[QÃmk ÷Áø»PÎ¾® EuÂkÁõß

£õh¢uøÚ¨ £i¨£uØPõ´ ¦zuPzøuz vÓ¢÷u©Úøuö¯[S® Aø»£õ¯Âhõx¦zv ÷©÷»õ[P÷Á £izvkÁõß

‰z÷uõ›h® Gøu²®•ßTmi÷¯ ÷Pmk÷Áø»PÒ ö\´vh÷ÁÂ¸®¤kÁõß G¨÷£õx®

|À»øu {øÚ¨£õß{øÚzuøua ö\õÀÁõßö\õßÚøua ö\´ÁõßGßÖ® G[PÒ ]›©z

48For free distribution

Discuss with your teachers the righteous qualities of Sirimath mentioned in this anthology. Think a bit, of the qualities you possess out of them as a student. Try to promote righteous qualities and habits in you as a school student.

The following poems in Tamil Literature show how important the amicable qualities of well-being and adhering them to your life for practice.

mOf;fhW mthntFsp ,d;dhr; nrhy; ehd;Fk;,Of;fh ,ad;w mwk;. mjpfhuk; - 4 Fws; - 35

zzB¾IHdj" wdYdj" fldamh" krl jpk l:d lsÍu wdÈfhka bj;a ùu hym;a O¾uhhs'ZZ

Giving up envy, lust, anger and using filthy words is a good virtue.

xOf;fKk; tha;ikAk; ehZk;,k; %d;Wk;,Of;fhu; Fbg;gpwe; jhu;. mjpfhuk; - 96 Fws; - 952

zzhym;a pß;hlska hq;= ùu" i;H l:d lsÍu" fndrejg" jxpdjg ìh ùu jeo.;a h' fï ksid ,Êcd ìh /lf.k Ôj;a ùu hym;s'ZZ

It is virtuous to live with good character. Be afraid of lies and cheating while being truthful.

epiwePu ePutu; Nfz;ik gpiwkjpg;gpd;ePu Ngijahu; el;G. mjpfhuk; - 79 Fws; - 782

zzwOHdmkh ,enQ whf.a hy.=K mQ¾K pkaøhd fuka jefâ' wOHdmkfhka wvq whf.a hy.=K wudjl fuka wvq ù hhs'ZZ

Virtues of educated persons grow like the full moon. The opposite happens to those who have got less education. ^j,a¨j¾;=udf.a ;srelal=r,a .%ka:fhka Wmqgd .kakd ,È'&

49For free distribution

Pay your affection to the following song that shows the necessity of well-being:

uf.a is; ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a huf.a is; msú;=re h ikaiqka h ;ekam;a hwdorh lreKdj ohd W;=rd .,kud isf;ys Ys,am yd .=K oyï we; /£.=re fo.=re ys; ñ;=re yd wjg ish¨ fokud yefok ieá n,d isá;s wdorhlskauf.a is; ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h ;ekam;a h'''$$mßirh ud rlS rlsñ uu mßirh f,dalhg nr fkdù jev msKsi uu yefoñjdikdjka; jQ wkd.;hla lrdmdi,ska u. olsk fyd| u orejd uuhs'''$$$$$

mo rpkh (¡ iurùr ùrjkaks .dhkh (¡- kd,kS rKisxy

Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:

My mind is Sober ...My mind is pure, calm, soberIn my mind where love, kindness and mercy over flows Skills and virtues remain. Parents, teachers, friends and all around meObserve me with love how I grow My mind is sober ............. ///I protect the environment, environment protects meI will grow for the benefit of the world Without being a burden to it, I grow for workI am the best child enlightened from the school To get a future with success ... ///

Singing - Nalani Ranasignhe Composed by - Samaraweera Weerawanni

50For free distribution

Given below is the paraphrase of the Sinhala song in Tamil language;

GÚxÒÍ® £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚxEÚxÒÍ® ¦Ûu©õÚx Aø©v¯õÚx £USÁ©õÚxAß¦, P¸øn, £õ\® ö£õ[Q¨ ¤µPõ]US®GÚxÒÍzvÀ Pø»²® uº©•® {ø»zv¸US®B]›¯º ö£ØÓõº •øÓø¯¨ £õºzv¸¨£õº Aß¦hßGÚxÒÍ® £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx £USÁ©õÚx|õß `Çø»¨ £õxPõ¨÷£ß GøÚ¨ £õxPõ¨÷£ßE»SUS¨ £õµ©õPõx GvºPõ»® ÷|õUQ £õh\õø»°÷» ÁÈPsh |À» ¤ÒøÍ |õß ¤ßSÔ¨¦ & AÆÁõÓõÚ £õhÀPøÍU Põø»÷ÁøÍ°À £õh\õø»°À ö\Â©kUP ÁÈö\´¯Ä®

2.4.2 Necessity of well-being

Man has to tend towards a very complex life pattern in this competitive world. Development took place in the fields of modern science, technology, and communication has directly influenced it. Diversities of likes and dislikes of individuals have caused to make it more intensified. Due to this, majority in the society try to behave imitating blindly without understanding fertility and infertility. This condition has become a severe social problem at present. Because of this, for the social upliftment, there are many factors that affect the increase of necessity of well-being. Some examples for them are given below:

²For the well-being of the society To live as a virtuous, loyal citizen and to work law-abiding in a society

²-Diversity in personal interestsOne should follow correct procedure when fulfilling personal interests as personal interests, likes and expectations differ

²Complexity of the life style When life has become complex, there is a tendency for people to earn money in wrong ways. People should earn by proper ways to lead a simple life

²Directing to earn wealth and to use wealth in just To direct citizens to earn by hard working and by his own efforts

²-JusticeHaving society accepted livinghood and livelihood

²PeaceTo maintain peace and harmony

51For free distribution

2.4.3 Qualities of well-being

Qualities that should be promoted in order to create cordial and peaceful environment in the human society can be introduced as qualities of well-being. Since these qualities are apt to lead a righteous life they are called as qualities of well-being.

Given below are some examples for qualities of well-being:

²Law abiding ²Listening well ²Generosity ²Gratitude ²Contentment ²Cordiality ²Righteousness ²Simplicity in life ²Courageousness ²Being away from anti-social activities

²Courageousness ²Being happy ²Being active ²Honesty ²Be thankful ²Kindness ²Patience ²Loving the environment ²Working to conscience ²Refrain from using liquor and drugs

Try to promote such virtues in you since childhood. It is a great help to make your present and future successful, good existence of the society and to make the future of the country good.

oek Wf.k .;alu;uhs flkl=f. j;alu.=K kqjK oelaluTng i,l;s rfÜ Tlafldu

Given below is the English paraphrase of the above poem:

Eruditeness is the wealth of an individual When your virtues and intelligence is seen, All the people in the country, Will treat you well

52For free distribution

Given below is the paraphrase of the above poem in Tamil Language:

AÔÄ® PÀÂ÷© J¸Á›ß Esø©¯õÚ Eøhø© & E® Sn¨£s¦PøÍU PshÄhß |õ÷h E®ø© ©vzx¨ ÷£õØÖ®

That is why the erudite individuals who lived in the past had expressed as above. Hence we must be careful to serve the country fruitfully as a good citizen, promoting the qualities of well-being by ourselves.

2.4.4 Results that occur due to acting without well-being

One will have to face severe incidents in his adult life as the qualities of well-being have not being practiced from his childhood. As the qualities of well-being are not practiced valuable human lives, animal lives, public properties, natural environment and all will be subjected to the unfavorable influences. Anyone who does not practise qualities of well-being, can be victimized to the fate expressed in the following song:

u,a,sfh krl ñ;=rka ms<s.kag tmd kx.sfh fkdfydìkdlï yqre fjkag tmdfnda.ïnr ismsß f.org tkag tmd i;=frl=g j;a ug jka ÿl fjkag tmd

o<Þ ueÿf¾ f;ajd y~ /õ fokjd l< mõ u;la ù oEi u f;;a fjkjd ishla jdrhla ueß ueß WmÈkjd ;snyg j;=r fjkqjg l÷<e,s fndkjd

,enqfõ wjjdo fkdfydìk wdrlh ÿokka ksid úh fykyqre udrlh ux fmr .sfha jrÈka msß mdrlh tA .sh uf.a wjidkh fmdarlhmo rpkh (¡ uydpd¾h iqks,a wdßhr;ak.dhkh(¡ úYdro iqks,a tÈßisxy

53For free distribution

Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:

Younger brother! Do not welcome bad friends.Younger sister! Do not practice unbecoming deeds.Do not come to prison at Bogambara.!Do not befall the sorrow occurred on me even on an enemy!

The sound of the service drum beating of the Temple of the Tooth Relic echoes. Eyes become wet recollecting the sins I have committed. I have born hundred times while dying and drinking tears instead of water.

Received the wrong advices. This deadly danger befell on me due to the company of bad friends. Earlier, I stepped alone a path full of wrongs. The end of that path occurs in gallows. Younger sister! Do not practice unbecoming deeds.Do not come to prison at Bogambara.!Do not befall the sorrow occurred on me even on an enemy!

Given below is the paraphrase of the above Sinhala song in Tamil Language:

u®¤÷¯ öPmh |s£÷Úõk ÷\µõ÷u u[øP÷¯ w¯ £ÇUP[PøÍ¨ £ÇPõ÷u ÷£õP®£øµ ]øÓa\õø»US Á¢xÂhõ÷u Gv›UPõÁx GÚx Pv ÷|µUThõx

u»uõ ©õÎøP°ß ÷uÛø\ ÷PmQÓx ö\´u£õÁzøu {øÚzxU Pspº Á¸QÓx ö\zxa ö\zxa vÚ•® ¤øÇUQß÷Óß usp¸US¨ £v»õP PspøµU SiUQß÷Óß

Ga\›UøP «Ô¯uõÀ Qøhzux ]øÓUTk |ßöÚÔ uÁÔ¯uõÀ ÂøÍ¢u÷uõ \Û°ß ÷Pk |õß |h¢u÷uõ SØÓ[PÒ ©¼¢u £õøu³k Ax GøÚ AÝ¨¤ øÁzu÷uõ yUS ©µz÷uõk

54For free distribution

Not practicing the qualities of well-being, any person living in the society may face to the plight mentioned below;

²Passing the life ill-fated ²Isolation of the individual by breaking down of inter-personal relationships. ²Destruction of natural resources ²Increase of expenditure, decrease of saving ²Increase wastage ²Breaking down of well-being

²Collapse social security ²Breaking down of social peace ²Increase of anti social activities ²Increase of mental stress ²Increase of misconducts ²Inclination towards bribes and corruptions ²Happen to live with fear and suspicion

2.4.5 How well-being influences good existence of the society

As mentioned above, if all follow qualities of well-being, it will be a great boon for the good existence of the society. We can achieve many benefits through it. Some examples are given below:

²Protection of others' rights ²Persuade to fulfill one's duties without delay ²Creation of peaceful environment in the society ²Ensuring social security ²Building up with justice and freedom of society ²Ability to expel bribery, corruptions, forgery, theft and other anti-social activities

You too determine to contribute for the good existence of the society by practicing qualities of well-being from your childhood. Follow the idea that ''Not from the country to us but something from us to the country''. Then you will get an ability to beautify the whole society, and the whole world.

55For free distribution

2.4.6 Co-existence

Man gets his birth from the family which is the smallest unit in the society. We all are members of it. When acting as a member of a family, love and protection of others are needed'

''Co-existence begins in the Family''

Any individual living in the society cannot live alone. Man happens to get support from various individuals and to assist each other. Man had been used to live in groups since his inception. Accordingly, acting co-operatively, while living together can be simply introduced as co-existence. An erudite concept presented on it is shown below:

"Co-existence is a state in which two or more groups are living together while respecting their differences and resolving their conflicts nonviolently"

By - Angela Nyawira

2.4.7 Necessity of co-existence

Read the following news headings well. Review these statements which present some events of co-existence.

Some groups of youth come forward to provide food and water to the wild animals during the drought

Youths of Sinhala, Tamil and Muslim get together to celebrate religious festivals

Friends come forward to help the friend with economic difficulties with books and foods happily

Many friendly countries donate for the flood victims of Sri Lanka 14th Wesak Day celebration of the United Nations-2017 in Sri Lanka with the participation of many countries

Whole village supported in thatching the roof of the house

56For free distribution

Given above are some examples for the necessity of co-existence in present society:

²To protect the unity of the diverse society ²For the fortification of social security ²To help the people those who cannot fulfill their needs ²For the promotion of the equality in the society that is unequal

2.4.8 Qualities of co-existence

Man is a social being by birth. Hence, the qualities like collectiveness and unity received the highest acceptance in the human society, and such qualities of well-being are given below. Try to inoculate such qualities in you too.

²Acting in collaboration ²Sharing ²Respecting others ²Cordiality ²Mutual trust ²Honesty ²Fulfill duties

Sing and enjoy the song given below related to co-existance bound with nature. Discuss how its meaning depicts co-existance.

j;=iqÿ wr,sh .il msfmkjdmsÉp frdai u,a je,l msfmkjd´¨ fk¨ï u,a ú,l msfmkjdtlu jÜáhl mkai,a hkjd $$

.srd u,s;a;ka wyfi irkjdkS, fldfnhshka mshdi,kjd $$

fmdä nÜáÉpka Wv b.sf,kjdwyig whs;sh lshkak ljqre;a kE

mo rpkh ( iqkS;d mS' úl%uf.a

j;=iqÿ wr,sh''''

mqxÑ l+ôfhda .=,la yokjdfõfhd tl;= ù yqUia n`Èkjd $$

uy jeis jeá,d fure b.sf,kjdfmdf<djg whs;sh lshkak ldg;a nE

j;=iqÿ wr,sh $$

.dhkh ( bka§jÍ wdßhisxy

57For free distribution

Given below is the English paraphrase of the above song:

Garden flowers and frangipani flowers blossom in treesJusmine and rose flowers blossom in creepersWater lily and lotus flowers blossom in lakesThey all go to the temple in one tray

Hanging parrots travel through the airEmerald dove fly in the skySmall common tailorbird fly upThere are no owners to the sky

Small ants build holesTermites build ant hillHeavy rains fall, swarmers flyNobody can declare the ownership for the land

Given below is the paraphrase of the above song in Tamil Language:

|¢v¯õÁmøh²® Aµ¼²® ©µzvÀ §UQßÓÚ©À¼øP²® ÷µõáõÄ® öPõi°À §UQßÓÚAÀ¼²® uõ©øµ²® }›À §UQßÓÚJ÷µ umiÀ §øáUSa ö\ÀQßÓÚ//

QÎ²® ø©ÚõÄ® ÁõÛÀ £ÓUS®©o¨¦ÓõÄ® ÁõÛÀ \g\›US®]mkU S¸ÂPÐ® ÷©÷» £ÓUS®ÁõÝUS ¯õ¸® E›ø© ÷PõµÂÀø»÷¯//

]ØöÓÖ¦® ÁøÍ Aø©US® PøÓ¯õÝ® JßÖTi ¦ØÓø©US®ö£¸©øÇ ö£õÈ¢x D\À £ÓUS®©sqUS E›ø© ÷Põµ GÁ¸US •i²®//

2.4.9 Importance of inculcating co-existence qualities to life

Man cannot live alone. Individual has to deal with family, community and society. Hence, there are many instances that people are to work collectively when engage in day to day activities. There are many occasions that need co-existence qualities. Hence, several examples are given below to show the importance of inculcating the co-existence qualities relevant to the life when working with others in day to day activities:

58For free distribution

²Personal development ²Establishment of peace ²Building up mutual friendship ²Acceleration of social development ²Ensuring of social security ²Minimizing conflicts

2.4.10 How well-being and co-existence become important for the individual and social development

Well-being and co-existence are two concepts bound to each other. There are many well-being qualities, derived from the past through generations, practiced by us. These qualities that are seen within us at large or minor level help for personal and social development. According to the availability of these qualities, several groups of people can be identified in the society. It should be noted that this categorization is based on the most outstanding characteristics of people.

01. Those who have high well-being qualities but less co-existence qualities - The people earn wealth by means of just or legal ways. They live without disturbing others. They contribute less in sharing happiness or sorrow with neighbours and friends. Participation for the weddings or funerals are also very less. They do not harm anyone, but the contribution to the social development is very poor.

02. Those who possess high co-existence qualities but less well-being qualities - These people earn wealth through various legal and illegal means. But, mostly lead a friendly life with neighbours and relatives, sharing their sorrows and happinesses. They are a burden to the society. Their means of income are not recommended by the society.

03. Those who possess less well-being and co-existence qualities -This type of people also can be seen among us occasionally. They earn wealth through different illegal means and nothing is done for the social development. They do not work co-operatively with others. You should be mindful when associating with them. You should determine to make them virtuous if possible and not to be such a person.

04. Those who possess both well-being and co-existence qualities to the maximum - These people earn wealth through just and legal means. They offer to help neighbours and relatives frequently. Those, who with such well-being and co-existence qualities are a great blessing. You should also determine to be one such person. In this manner, by developing qualities of well being and co-exitance in you, you can contribute to the social upliftment, fruitfully. However, it should be

59For free distribution

noted that the categorization of people in society as ''Good'' or ''Bad'' is not suitable. In a person who is well-known as ''bad'', there can be a little good. One should take efforts to inculcate wholesome qualities understanding characteristics of people are a complex. This helps personal and social development.

1. List out the virtues you have identified in you and your friends or elders you associate. 2. Present a role play in two minutes to highlight the well-being qualities.3. Complete the following table with the influences that occur when well-being is not followed.

Influence on individual Influence on the society 1 ..........................................................2 ..........................................................1 ..........................................................2 ..........................................................

4. Suggest activities that could be utilized to expand well-being qualities in the society. 5. Explain by using examples how well-being and co-existence become important for the social development.

Activity 2.4

2.5 Co-operative Movement

2.5.1 Introduction to co-operative movement

Sri Lankans have been motivated to live in co-existence since past. It is well-aware that you might have studied well-about well-being and co-existence in earlier lessons. People show much willingness to help each other in the activities like ''Aththam'', Sramadana, meritorious activities, planting paddy, etc.

Robert Owen The father of the co-operative movement

Official logo of the co-operative movement

60For free distribution

Accordingly, The co-operative movement can be introduced as the organization that was established voluntarily to get common needs and social welfare done collectively, co-operatively and equality.

British nationalist Robert Owen is considered as the ''Father of Co-operative Movement''. Read carefully the definition presented by him.

The Co-operative Movement is the service based on good social environment which includes feeling of co-operation and social value in place of competition that exists among the people for economic development.

British nationalist, Robert Owen – 1845

The following definition is the official definition about modern co-operative movement presented by International Cooperative Alliance.

A co-operative is an autonomous association of persons united voluntary to meet their common economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations through a jointly owned and democratically – controlled enterprise.

(International Co-operative Alliance -ICA - 1995)

Working collectively and helping each other mutually are the main features of co-operation. Through this, the spacial quality expected, is the collaboration instead of competitiveness.

2.5.2 Several objectives of the co-operative movement

²Fulfilling the needs of the members ²Creating a path for man to live better ²Assisting to upgrade the living condition of people ²Fulfill the needs by the collective power that can not be fulfilled individually

The motto of the co-operative is

''Each for all – All for each''

61For free distribution

2.5.3 The task of the present co-operative movement

The co-operative movement began first as credit societies.

The first co-operative society established in Sri Lanka is Dumbara co-operative credit society. It began at Theldeniya in 1906. At present, it has developed up to a number of different types of co-operative societies. The following are some such co-operative societies functioning in Sri Lanka:

²Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies ²Co-operative Credit Societies ²Agro - product Co-operative Societies Eg - Tea, Coconut, Rubber ²Fisheries Co-operative Societies ²Industrial Co-operative Societies Eg - Weaving, Carpentry, Coir industry ²Bio Resource Co-operative Societies Eg - Livestock farming ²Hospital Co-operative Societies ²Transport Co-operative Societies ²Housing Co-operative Societies ²School Co-operative Societies

Tasks performed by the co-operative service

²Selling consumer goods at low cost ²Supplying credit facilities ²Conducting various welfare services ²Maintaining member's savings ²Conducting various awareness programmes Eg - Self employment/small business

²Provision of banking service ²Provision of transport services ²Purchasing of agro products ²Provision of insurance services ²Maintenance of hospital ²Provision of funeral services ²Conducting fuel filling stations

Accordingly, the co-operative movement that is dedicated to provide many services which are necessary to fulfill various needs of life must be appreciated.

62For free distribution

2.5.4 Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies and School Co-operative Societies

1. Multi-purpose co-operative societies

There are a large number of co-operative societies controlled by the Co-operative Department. The institutions which have been established collecting all together are introduced as, multi-purpose cooperative societies. Co-operative societies that have been established to get more tasks fulfilled, instead of credit cooperative societies are introduced by this name.

The basic objective of this is to create economic, social and cultural development of members according to the co-operative principles. The target of this is to inculcate feelings such as thrifty, self donation and mutual donation. To get the membership of a co-operative society, 18 years of age must be completed. All those who reside in the authorized region of a co-operative society, can get the membership of the co-operative society of that particular region. Many co-operative societies can be seen in present Sri Lanka. By December 2013, 14221 co-operative societies had been established in Sri Lanka. Among them, 308 were multi-purpose co-operative societies. Among them the number of co-operative societies that are active are 304.

Services provided by the Multi Purpose Co-operative Societies

²Conducting co-operative regional outlets to increase the services to the people ²Conducting of credit societies ²Contribution to provide funeral services ²Provision of transport and fuel services ²Conducting hospital services ²Banking services ²Self services co-operative outlets ²Milk bars/ Restaurants ²Educational services ²Insurance services ²Pre-school ²Pawning

63For free distribution

2. School co-operative societies

School co-operative societies have been established with the idea that the cooperative must be started at the small age. These co-operative societies are conducted by the students under the patronage of the principal and the staff. The number of school co-operative societies that have been registered by December 2013 was 1134. Since then, 371 societies are active.

Objectives

²Fulfilling the economic, social and cultural needs and welfare needs of the member according to the co-operative principles ²Directing to use co-operative system ²Making co-operative features and qualities popular in the school ²Generating creative leaders ²Achieving active group of citizens who work with conscious

Activities of these co-operatives are done by the students under the patronage of the principal and the staff.

Expected Targets

²Provision of all necessary stationeries to the students at low cost ²Supply of hygiene milk and food varieties of reasonable cost ²Practicing the habit of saving from the childhood ²Supplying the educational needs ²Conducting fruitful programmes and holding competitions ²Practicing children to continue virtues and customs

2.5.5 Services that could be obtained from the school co-op society to the students

²Ability to buy school stationery at reasonable prices ²Ability to buy food items at reasonable prices ²Ability to buy sports goods at a reasonable price ²Leadership training ²Getting used to a collective life pattern ²Provision of other needs

64For free distribution

These school co-operative societies are well-functioning in Malaysia at present. School co-operative society of Dharamaraja College at Kandy is also functioning very successfully.

Source - ICA web site - www.ica.org

²Explain briefly the importance of establishing a school co-operative society in your school

Activity 2.5

2.6 Importance of acting as a member of global village while protecting indigenousness

2.6.1 Broad vision about the world

Man is a member of the global village. When we act as a member of the global village, we must create a good understanding about the world. When acting in the competitive world there must be a broad vision about it. Various changes in the fields like economic, society, and politics of the present world take place continuously. As a citizen, a knowledge and understanding about all those changes must be achieved. Acting with the world with such knowledge and understanding is known as the broad vision of the world.

Due to the continuous changes occur in the world, inheritance of new information and more creations occur changing existing information. When acting as a universal member, being vigilant on these changes is important. You must assist them as much as you can. That becomes a great support to make others lives as well as your life, good.

2.6.2 Appreciate indigenousness meaningfully

Indigenous culture

All the countries in the world possess specific cultures inherited to each of them. That is the indigenous culture of those countries. Sri Lanka too is a multi-cultural country since the past. As well as indigenous people, different ethnic groups like Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims, and Burghers live in Sri Lanka. They believe in different religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, and Catholicism. There are identical cultures inherited to these ethnic groups. Various different cultural features can be seen in them.

65For free distribution

²The popular cultural features among different ethnic groups which are typical to Sri Lanka are given below. See whether you can identify them.

Local productions

Production of goods and services within the country itself using the local resources is local production. Such local productions which are inherited to Sri Lanka are shown below:

66For free distribution

Things endemic to the country

Things that are typical to a country itself are called endemic things. Many features, which are endemic to Sri Lanka are found in the country. Indigenous medicines, endemic plants and animals are important among them.

Indigenous medicinal herbs

Venivelgeta Pus Vel

Bambara VelKothala Himbutu

Endemic Plants

Kekuna Badulla

Maha Rathmal

Wild breadfruitEtamba

67For free distribution

Endemic Animals

Jungle fowlAn Katussa

Pathirana Salaya

Black MonkeyNeela Kobeiya

Identification and learning of other cultures by moving beyond the local frame

We have learnt about the indigenous culture and main cultural features earlier. There are many cultural features indigenous to Sri Lanka, and to other countries as well. Though they are inherited to those countries only, we can learn a lot from them. Hence, it is important to know about cultural features of several countries going beyond, indigenous culture.

There are many cultural features in Japan that is an East Asian country. Greeting with a bow, wearing Kimono, sumo game, veneration of the dead take an important place among them. Japan is a country that has processed to a massive development. But, Japan reached the development while protecting their culture. Cultural features like greeting with a bow is well-popular among the elders and the young even today.

Greeting with a bow Kimona

Sumo game

68For free distribution

Cultures of the African countries are totally different to this. Given below are chief among them:

African cultural features

When we take China, that is also an Asian country, which follows many cultural features based on dragon.

Chinese cultural features

Acting as a member of global society while appreciating the indigenousness and protecting national identity

We have discussed about the ''Wide vision about the world'' earlier. Accordingly, arrival of new technology, fashions, cultural features, etc occur with the changing of the world. But we must be intelligent when we use them. We must be careful to use the models we collect from the universal society, matching the needs of our country. If not, we will have to face problems we never think about.

You might have heard the saying '' Siya Rata de Siri Sapade'' – Local goods give best comforts – Our forefathers in the past produced everything they needed by themselves. There, they were very careful not to harm animals, plants and the environment. They gifted the needful for generation absorbing world's knowledge while protecting ancient culture. A best example for this can be taken from our neighbouring country, India. Since the past, Indians show a tendency to use local productions. That example has been given to them even from the rulers of India. The cloth worn by Mahatma Ghandhi had been prepared by himself.

69For free distribution

Mahathma Ghandhi weaving his own cloth

We too must be nourished by such models. We must be careful to use models received from those cultures with local modifications.

2.6.3 Identification of the way how co-existence works globally

Norochchole power station

Obtaining foreign aids

Any person living in the world cannot live alone. Living alone is a difficult task for any ethnic group or a country. There are several factors cause for this:

²Unequal distribution of resources ²Global diversity ²Inability to produce all the things needed for a country in the same country ²Rapid development of information technology of the world with the technical advancement ²Conversion of the total world into a global village

Above mentioned factors have caused to function co-existence globally. We all, as an individual and as a country, have to work in accordance with. If not, we will be isolated as a country in the presence of the world.

70For free distribution

2.6.4 Mutual inter-dependency

Between the region where we live and neighbours and at places of work too mutual inter dependence, co-operation and co-existence can be seen. Working co-operatively while helping each other is mutual inter-dependency. Co-existence among ethnic types and religions is the base of peace and development of a country. As a country, there is a mutual inter-dependency with other countries of the world. Due to this, various organizations have been established by the countries of the world.

Eg - United Nations Organizations, SARRC Organization, Union of Europe, Asian Organization

1.Name separately cultural features, cultural heritages and attributes of culture inherited to Sri Lanka only.2. Name endemic plants, animals and herbs in Sri Lanka.3. Name indigenous plants and animals that have faced the threat of extinction as you know. 4. Present your views on “When acting with global village, indigenousness must be protected.” 5. Selecting some countries in the world, study cultural attributes of them.

Activity 2.6

71For free distribution

²The society too is subjected to various changes with the development of science and technology.

²New inventions that emerged through explorations and researches, have caused for social advancement.

²Creation of technical tools are in abundance due to the increase in population and complex human necessities.

²Technical tools should be used beneficial to the society.

²Agricultural, industrial and service sectors of the economy in a country change continuously with modern technology.

²Many new trends in the job market associated with agriculture, industry and service have emerged.

²In the complex life pattern, the world has tended towards competitive life pattern. Due to this, good qualities are getting detached from man.

²The problems that we have to face can be avoided by promoting well-being and co-existence.

²The Co-operative Movement has been established with the objective of helping each other in co-operation.

²At present, co-operative is an institute that supplies many services.

²It is important to act as a citizen of global society while appreciating the indigenousness and protecting the identity with a wide vision about the world.

²When acting globally, co-existence and mutual depending are needed.

Summary

72For free distribution

Introduction

Democracy is a governing system as well as a life style. Democracy can simply be defined as a governing system based on public preference. Among the governing systems seen in the world today, the democratic governance has been given a prominent place.

Studying this chapter, you will be able to gain broader understanding about the followings:

²Democracy ²Basic features of a democratic governance ²Duties bound by the rights of a citizen in a democratic society ²Tasks should be done by the political parties to establish social unity ²Elections and franchise of a democratic society ²Acting as a democratic citizen with assertiveness ²Contribution to nation building as a democratic citizen

3.1.1 Introduction to democracy

The class teacher of Grade 9 of Namalyaya Maha Vidyalaya wanted to elect a monitor at the beginning of the new term. The teacher inquires the students a suitable way to elect. Given below is a part of the conversation took place:

Democratic Governance03

73For free distribution

Januda

I'd like to elect Rashmika as the monitor

But, I don't like to elect him

Ramesh

Denvi

We'd like Rashik as the monitor

We'd like to elect Januda as the monitor

Fathima

Teacher, let's have a vote and elect the monitor by checking the preference. I think it is a democratic way to do this. Chenethu

Devaki

Chenethu, What a lot you know! Today we will be able to learn about democracy. There is a topic of Democracy in our Civic Education subject.

Teacher

Children, you have proposed many names. So it is not an easy task to elect a monitor. Well, can anybody suggest a way to take a fair decision that can be accepted by everyone in such a situation ?

Very good. Chenethu's idea is really valuable. Let's have a vote and elect the monitor who gets the majority of votes.

Teacher

The English word ''Democracy'' is formed by two Greek words ''Demos'' and Kratos''. ''Demos'' means public while ''kratos'' denotes power. Therefore, the meaning of the word ''Democracy'' in Greek language is the power of people.

74For free distribution

Scholars have given various definitions for Democracy. A few such definitions are given below for your knowledge:

Democracy is a public governance done by the people for the people. Abraham Lincoln

Democracy is a governing system which provides rights for everybody. Sealer

Democracy can be introduced as a system of governance done by the people with the decision of the majority. Democracy is important as a governing system, as well as a life style. Fulfilling duties while enjoying rights, respecting others' views, taking decisions through discussions and respecting equity are some of the features of a democratic life style. Through making such features as the vision of people, a good and peaceful society builds up. It is important to develop such features as a member of a family as well as a member of the school. Further, developing such features within all the members of the society confirms the well-being of a democratic governance.

Activity 3.1

1. Collect some definitions of democracy. 2. Build up a simple definition of democracy of your own.

Basic types of democracy

The teacher in charge of Civic Education of Grade 9, Namalyaya Maha Vidyalaya came to the class in her period. A part of the conversation took place between the students and the teacher in the class is given below:

75For free distribution

I have heard that something called Direct Democracy functioned in the past. Banuka

Rajeshvari

Yes. Yes. I have heard that Direct Democracy had functioned in the Greek, city of Athens.

Doesn't the Direct Democracy function today ?

Siyam

Thilona

In one of the books I have read, I found that today mostly Indirect Democracy functions. In some instances we can see features of Direct Democracy in Indirect Democracy.

Very good children. You know a lot about the lesson that I am going to teach you today.

Teacher

Direct Democracy

Democracy

Indirect Democracy

Direct democracy

The main feature of direct democracy is the direct participation of people in governing. The governance that existed in Greek City State (known as polis) of Athens was direct democracy. The main governing institution of Athens was citizen council. There the public opinion was inquired directly. All the citizens had participated in governance.

Direct involvement of people in decision making and governance is direct democracy.

Women, slaves and foreigners were not allowed to participate in the governance in Athens where direct democracy functioned. Only elderly male resided in the city were given opportunity to take an active role in the direct democratic governance.

76For free distribution

Reasons for easy functioning of direct democracy in the past

²Limited human needs ²Limited population ²Easy to discuss, take decisions and gathering in one place

The problems of implementing direct democracy at present

²Immense population ²Difficulty of gathering in one place ²Complexity of human needs ²Complex nature of present governance

Activity 3.2

1. Explain briefly the problems arising out of implementing direct democracy at present giving examples.2. List out some weaknesses in direct democracy in Greek State of Athens if any.

Indirect democracy

²As it was difficult to implement direct democracy, indirect democracy began. ²Governing done by the public representatives is a feature of indirect democracy. Public representatives are elected by the elections held time to time. ²Indirect democracy can be introduced as representative democracy.

The constitution provides opportunities to inquire the public preference directly on some factors in countries where indirect democracy functions today.

Referendum can be regarded as an example for a function of direct democratic procedure. Holding referendum is legalized by the present Sri Lankan constitution, in our country too.

3.1.2 Basic features of a democratic governance

The basic feature of a democratic governance is that the government is directed by the representatives elected by the decision of the majority. There can be many features seen where a democratic governance is practised.

77For free distribution

Given below is a creative way of presenting the basic features of democracy done by a group of Grade 9 students:

Basic Features of democratic governance

Practice of universal franchise

Holding Free and fair election

Competitive party system

Government is taken over by the political party which elects the majority of representatives

Divide the country into polling divisions

Independence of judiciary

Freedom, equity and rights

Existance of free mass - mediaOpprtunity to express views freely

Existance of government and opposition

Election of governments and rulers using universal franchise

Taking decisions by majority

Equal treatment under law

Act in accordance with the constitution

Sovereignty of judiciary

Basic features

of a Democratic Government

78For free distribution

3.1.3 Features needed to have a successful democratic governance

Students are given instructions to prepare a poster by the teacher in charge of Civic Education, collecting information on the features needed to have a successful democracy. Given below are the details, included in the poster, created by Devin's group:

Factors that determine the success of democracy

²Having high political knowledge and understanding of the public ²Taking intelligent decisions when electing rulers by the public ²Having a dedicated and honest leadership ²Having a good economic condition in the country ²Having media freedom ²Existence of sovereignty of the judiciary in the country ²Clear division of functions of the government ²Existing a powerful opposition

An occasion casting votes at a polling centre

3.1.4 Some countries where indirect democracy functions

² Sri Lanka ² France² India ² Switzerland² Japan ² The United States of America² The United Kingdom ² Canada

79For free distribution

Activity 3.3

Some features needed to have successful democracy are given in column I. Write briefly in column II how those features affect successful democratic governance.

Column IColumn IIFeatures needed for successful democracy The effect on successful democratic governanceHaving high political knowledge and understanding of the publicDedicated and honest leadershipActing intelligently when electing rulers Existing a powerful oppositionFunctioning the sovereignty of judiciary

(Further information about democratic governance can be learnt in the first chapter of Grade 10 Civic Education textbook.)

3.2 The duties bound by the rights of a citizen in a democratic society

3.2.1 Rights of a citizen

A conversation taken place among Grade 9 students about the rights of a citizen in a democratic society is given below:

Nilupuli

My father told me that rights are the recognition of the society for a person to lead a good life.

We all have a right to have a name and a nationality.

Sadev

80For free distribution

Janani

It's true that we have a right for a name and a nationality. I think the right to live freely is the most important among all the others.

Not only that, what about the right to education?

Supun

Fathima

We have a right to do a legal job, don't we?

It is important to have the right to follow any religion one likes.

Nisal

Right to elect rulers in a democratic society too is an important right of a citizen.

Raj

You all are very good. Almost everyone knows the rights of a citizen in a democratic society.

Teacher

One student listened to this conversation, and summarized the rights of a citizen as follows:

²Right to live ²Right to possess a name and a nationality ²Right to obtain education ²Right to do a legal job ²Right to follow a religion that one likes ²Right to elect rulers ²Right to live in an area that one likes ²Right to vote a party that one prefers ²Right to join unions

Duties bound by rights cause for the safeguarding of rights. This would also safeguard other's rights. Let's inquire such duties.

81For free distribution

3.2.2 Duties to be fulfilled to the society while enjoying rights

When enjoying rights, what we have to fulfill to the society can be regarded as duties. Each duty is bound by a right. In fact duties and rights are like two sides of a coin. As Sri Lankans, we have been fulfilling duties from generation to generation since past.

Fulfilling duties is a must to safeguard peace and harmony, co-existence and social security in a democratic society.

According to that, there are many duties to be fulfiled to the society, as a citizen, when we enjoy the rights. Some examples are given below:

²Educate well ²Obeying and respecting parents/teachers ²Caring elders ²Keeping the environment clean ²Protecting public property ²Respecting and caring religious leaders ²Being law-abiding ²Assisting the police and the security forces ²Paying taxes regularly and accurately imposed by the government ²Being honest to pay bills for the services used ²Avoiding bribery and anti social activities and help to abolish them ²Avoiding anti social activities ²Rejecting terrorism ²Protecting cultural heritage ²Not being treacherous ²Proper garbage disposal and support the steps taken by the government ²Fostering the national unity

As a student, your duty is to have a good education and be a good citizen to the society. For that, teachers' duty is to provide you with knowledge, skills, attitudes and competencies. Fulfilling duties by the teachers would directly influence to safeguard your rights.

82For free distribution

The basic duties to be fulfilled by a citizen are given in the Article No. 28 of the constitution of 1978. Some of them are given below:

²To defend and follow the constitution and the law ²To improve the national upliftment and to foster national unity ²To work faithfully in one's chosen occupation ²To preserve and protect public property, and to combat against misuse of public property and waste ²To respect the rights and freedom of others ²To protect nature and conserve its natural resources

3.2.3 Importance of enjoying rights within the legal frame work

Every citizen has to enjoy rights within the legal frame work. Otherwise, it would cause to violate others' rights. If all the citizens enjoy rights within the legal frame work, it will cause the national development.

²Although every citizen has a right to use a road, that should be done under the rules and regulations of roadways. ²Although every citizen has a right to do a job, that job should be a legal one. ²Although there is a right to win labour rights, it should not be done against the law of the country.

When enjoying rights some limitations are imposed with the intension of protecting social well-being and peace. Some examples for that are media prohibition during war conditions, rallies at times of destroying lives and public property and prohibiting picketing can be taken as some examples. That is highly effective towards the social well-being as well as the national development.

3.3 Let's identify the functions of a political party

3.3.1 Introducing political parties

There was a discussion about political parties between two Grade 9 students. Given below are two simple definitions of political parties presented by two students:

83For free distribution

A group of people organized for the purpose of getting power is a political party.

A group of people represented to fulfil the needs of the country is a political party.

Definitions of political parties given by various scholars are stated below for your knowledge:

A political party is an organized entity of people with the aim of getting the power of the country and enacting it based on state principles.

Maurice Duverger

A political party is a group composed of people to serve national requirement under common principles.

Edmond Bark

What is meant by a political party is a group of people organized to obtain the State power based on certain principles.

84For free distribution

3.3.2 Different types of party systems in various countries

There are different types of party systems functioning in our country. Political parties function in other countries too. Political parties are categorized according to the functions of the party system of the country.

Single Party System

Political Parties

Bi-Party System

Multi-party system

If only one party functions in a country, it has a single-party system. The party system functions in socialist countries is the example.

e.g. - ²North Korea ²Cuba

If two parties actively function to get the power of a country it is called bi-party system. Many other political parties can be seen in these countries. But they are not powerful to get the power. Only two major parties function to win the power.

e.g. - ²The United States of America ²The United Kingdom

If more than two political parties function in a country, it is called a country with multi party system. The main feature of a country with a multi-party system is that they try to win the power by uniting with many parties.

e.g. - ²Sri Lanka ²India

3.3.3 Duties of a political party

²Mobilising the scattered public opinion ²Promoting the aims and politics of the party ²Training future leaders ²Making the public aware ²Respecting democratic political views and opinions of the opponent parties ²Competition with the other parties to win the power of the country ²Providing social welfare services

85For free distribution

3.3.4 The role of a political party to establish social unity

A large number of people having various kinds of views can be seen in a country. The duty of a political party should be to direct them towards a common goal. Thereby, a party should not work only to achieve its political goals.

The major responsibility of social development in a country is possessed by political parties. Accordingly, some of the functions to be fulfilled by political parties are given below:

²Implementing democratic ruling meaningfully based on the national needs disregarding religious, ethnic and geographical differences ²Creating a basis for all the ethnic groups to exist in a multicultural society to enjoy their rights ²National development through national unity ²Following a policy to refrain from religious and ethnic conflicts ²Dedicate to establish sustainable peace and for living with peace, co-existance, co-operativity and national unity

3.4 Franchise and elections

3.4.1 Franchise

The right to express one's opinion at an election to elect people's representatives and to check public opinion is franchise.

Franchise is the preference. Further, expressing one's opinion at an election to elect rulers or representatives is franchise. Among the rights of a citizen in a democratic country, franchise is given a prominent place. The right to elect people's representatives at an election is regarded as franchise.

In our country, the citizens who complete 18 years of age are entitled legally for the franchise. It is necessary to include the name properly in the electoral list.

Given below are some of the reasons for disqualification to be an elector according to the constitution of 1978:

86For free distribution

²If he is not a citizen of Sri Lanka ²If he is under any law in Sri Lanka found to be of unsound mind ²If he is disqualified with civic rights ²If he is given a life imprisonment ²If he is sentenced to death ²If he is a named bankrupt by law

3.4.2 Elections

In a democratic governance, representatives are elected by the citizens casting their votes. Elections are held to elect people's representatives and to check the public opinion on important matters of the country.

Expressing one's vote is exercised in different situations. Through that, electing representatives for government institutions in a democratic society is done. Not only that to obtaining the public opinion in relation to important events of the country, to react to that, vote is used. Accordingly, election is the method of checking public opinion of democratic countries.

Elections functioning in Sri Lanka at present: ²Presidential election ²Parliament election ²Provincial Council election ²Election of Local Government Institutions

3.4.3 Universal franchise

Franchise is granted to all qualified citizens to express their right to vote in elections without discrimination. Teacher of Civic Education inquired about the limited franchise that functioned, before getting the universal franchise in our country.

I learnt in History that we gained limited franchise under the constitutional reforms in 1910. Franchise was given only to the males who were above 21 years, educated and rich. Damith

That constitutional reform is introduced as Crew Mc Cullum reforms.

Amjad

87For free distribution

Bhagya

A significant feature of the Crew Mc Cullum reforms is the electing of representatives by voting to the Legislative Council for the first time.

Among the unofficial representatives, four had been elected at the limited election. Vihanga

The first Member of the Parliament elected was Sir Ponnambalam Ramanadan on behalf of the educated Sri Lankans.Vihanga

Well. You have learnt a lot about the limited franchise. Now I'll explain you how we got the universal franchise.Teacher

At the limited election, two for the Europeans, one for the Burghers and one for the educated Sri Lankans had been elected.Devaki

Universal franchise was given to the Sri Lankan citizens, both males and females, who were above 21 years of age by the Donoughmore Constitutional Reforms in 1931. Hence the Universal Franchise provided basis for the welfare of the citizens. The age limit for the universal franchise has been reduced from 21 to 18 years in 1958.

Qualifications required to grant franchise ²Being a citizen of Sri Lanka ²Completion of 18 years of age ²Citizen's name should be included in the electoral list ²Being a person not subjected to disfranchise

Factors to be considered when casting the vote ²Electing educated, intelligent and exemplary leaders as representatives ²Being alert of policy papers produced before the elections ²Electing leaders who take care of public expectations instead of having personal expectations ²Electing leaders who are dedicated to implement national goals and principles

88For free distribution

Importance of universal franchise ²Getting opportunity to all the citizens who are qualified to cast vote for one's political opinion, without any discrepancy ²Getting opportunity to elect suitable leaders ²Getting opportunity to all citizens to engage in active politics ²Being able to expand political knowledge of the people ²Developing the sense of citizens that they are stake holders of governance ²Getting opportunity to elect rulers whom they like and reject rulers they dislike

3.4.4 Rights of the public related to elections

Election is an opportunity where people participate in governance. Let us simply discuss only two strategies of electing representatives at elections. They are introduced as representative systems.

²Simple Majority Representative system ²Proportional Representative system

There was a discussion about the representative methods among the students in the class. Later, they displayed two definitions of their own in front of the class.

Simple Majority Representative System is electing the candidate who won the majority of votes among the others of the electoral district.

89For free distribution

Proportional Representative system is the comparative distribution of members according to the number of votes gained by a party or a group at an election.

Great Britain is an example for a country that holds elections using Simple Majority Representation system. Even in our country the same system functioned from 1931 - 1978.

Members for the parliament, provincial councils and Local Government Institutions are elected based on Proportional Representative System.

The teacher in-charge of Civic Education inquired about the rights and duties of citizens at an election. Based on a group discussion Devni's group came up to present a leaflet.

Rights of citizens related to election

²Inclusion of one's name in the electoral list ²Right to vote ²Getting the membership of a political party as one wishes ²Establishment of political parties ²Organising political meetings, taking part in them and expressing opinions ²Contesting as a candidate in elections ²Engaging in political propaganda activities ²Criticizing the government based on fair reasons

Duties of citizens related to election

²Casting the vote ²Following the rules and regulations of elections ²Avoidance of violence ²Acceptance of victory and defeat in equanimity ²Helping to implement election rules ²Canvassing without violating others' rights. ²Expressing ideas without damaging others' dignity ²Respecting others' rights while enjoying victory and defeat ²Working without harming the law and order of the country and not supporting such activities

90For free distribution

3.5 Assertiveness

3.5.1 Introduction to Assertiveness

Assertiveness means working on just, reasonable and firm principles according to one's own self-conscience. Assertiveness is a quality that should be developed right from the beginning as a student. It is very important to work with assertion to succeed your future life.

3.5.2 Qualities necessary to develop assertiveness within a person

Softness

Benevolence

Honesty

Not being aggressive

Exemplarycharacteristics

Appreciation of justice

Firmness

Loyalty

Fairness

Respecting others' views

Work with broad understanding

Expressing personal opinion directly

Self assertivenessAssertiveness with others

²In the presence of any challenge being without changing one's proper and fair actions ²To do everything according to one's self-assertiveness ²Even at challenging situations not to involve in any unfair deals even under influence ²To work on firm principle critically with optimistic attitudes

²When working with others, to work with one's own principles, self-conscience, rules and regulations and social norms ²Expressing one's own feelings when and where necessary ²Acting critically with positive attitudes and firm principles ²Responding firmly on correct things without having any personal benefits ²Need to be optimistic, firm and constructive when building up assertiveness with others

91For free distribution

Activity 3.4

Some of the qualities necessary to develop assertiveness within a person are given in Column I. State how these qualities influence personal development in column II.

Column I Column II

Qualities necessary to develop assertivenessHow it influences personal development

Honesty

Appreciating Justice

Exemplary characteristicsBenevolence

3.6 Nation Building

3.6.1 Introduction to the concept ''Nation Building''

Nation Building is working together with different ethnic groups, religious groups or social groups as one nation to achieve development goals facing future challenges. It is essential to disregard differences of ethnic, religious, parties, caste or creed in nation building.For an example, in our country people belong to Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim, Burgher live together. Further, they belong to different religious groups such as Buddhists, Hindus, Islamics, Catholics and Christians. Everybody must dedicate for nation building with a sense of Sri Lankans.

Need of a national policy for nation building

3.6.2 Introduction to national policy

A long term action plan prepared in order to achieve the identified national development needs, is called as a national policy. It should exclude political party differences. The main focus should be the development of the country. Further the national policies should be for the betterment of the country, not for the personal needs or personal expectations of the rulers. Whatever the government comes to power, the national policy should continuously exist further.

92For free distribution

National policy for education, national policy for economic development and national policy for proper garbage disposal can be given as some examples.

3.6.3 Need of a national policy

Having a national policy is essential to fulfil the development needs of a country. It helps to achieve public expectations as well as to reach the specific objectives.

Some of the benefits gained by having a national policy are given below:

²Economic and social development of the country ²Achieving specific objectives and goals ²Fulfill public expectations ²Help to achieve future challenges ²National unity occurs ²Creating sustainable national peace ²Creating sustainable development

3.6.4 Contribution to national policy making

Contribution to national policy making is a duty and a responsibility of everybody. It is important to provide active contribution as well as to do so without having personal benefits. Given below are some ideas of Grade 9 students, regarding the ways of contribution to nation building as a citizen:

²Assisting to identify national needs ²Making aware of the relevant sectors regarding identified regional needs ²Making suggestions and procedures for national policy making ²Contributing to national policy making ²Taking part in national policy making without having personal benefits ²Working according to the national policies

93For free distribution

3.6.5 Working according to the national policy

It is important to work according to the national policy as well as to contribute actively in policy making.

Given below are some examples:

²Appreciating national policies that focus on public well-being ² Active contribution to implement accepted national policies ²Contribution to national development by working according to the national policies

3.6.6 Importance of dedicated contribution for nation building

It is very important to provide dedicated contribution for nation building.Some examples for that are given below:

²Everyone's contribution towards nation building with a sense of patriotism ²Mental and physical commitment of all the citizens to their job/ profession to build the country ²Whatever a citizen does, should be done aiming at the national development

Dear children, you may involve in different activities such as cleaning the classroom, cleaning the school premises, growing plants, proper garbage disposal, etc. in the school. Although they all seem to be minor activities, they play a major role in nation building. When small children get together, we can do a great contribution to nation building as creating a big river by collecting small rain drops.

3.6.7 Procedure to be followed for nation building as a citizen

Think about the steps to be followed for nation building. As a citizen we can do an immense service for the country to stand as one nation. Some procedures to be followed for that, examples are given below:

94For free distribution

²Fulfilling personal duties well

²Paying attention to what a person can do to the society rather than what the society can do to a person

²Need of dedication towards national unity and peace as a citizen

²Maintaining an affordable lifestyle

²Protecting public property

²Conserving environment

²Working for personal development while contributing to national development

²Providing maximum contribution to national development

²Working without expecting any personal benefits

²Performing one's duty honestly and committedly

²Not engaging in activities that are threats or influences for national security

²Providing one's service to the national development by getting good knowledge and labour

²Refrain from mal-activities like theft, corruption bribery, etc.

Activity 3.5

List the ways that you can contribute for nation building as a school student.

95For free distribution

²Democracy is a governing system as well as a life style.

²Enjoying rights of a citizen in a democratic society should be done within a legal frame work.

²Franchise and elections are very important rights of a citizen in a democratic society.

²People get opportunity to participate in governance through indirect representation in elections.

²Franchise granted to all qualified citizens without discrimination is called universal franchise.

²Working on just and reasonable principles with self-confidence is called assertiveness.

²Having assertiveness with one self and working assertively with others highly enhance social development.

²For Nation Building, it is highly necessary for all the citizens to dedicate without any discrimination.

²There are a large number of qualities necessary to develop assertion within a person.

²Self assertion and assertion with others cause social development.

²Working together as one nation to achieve development goals facing future challenges of different ethnic groups, religious groups and societies is important.

²It is very important to work based on fruitful national policies for nation building.

²It is very important to fulfil duties as a citizen to nation building.

²One should work devotedly as a Sri Lankan, to build up national unity and sustainable peace.

Summary

96For free distribution

Introduction

In the continuity of our daily requirements, different types of services are needed to be utilized. Some of these services are very closely connected to our lives. As such, they have become essential services. Out of such essential services, health and sanitation, waste disposal, disease control, safety, secure places to spend leisure peacefully and clean and safe roadways occupy important positions. Therefore, the need has arisen for a public institution to mediate with the supply of these essential services to the public.

To fulfil such regional requirements more fruitfully and efficiently, special institutions established in Sri Lanka are introduced as Local Government Institutions. They function under three categories now as Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and Pradeshiya Sabhas.

The aim of this chapter is to look into the functions of these Local Government Institutions broadly.

By studying this chapter you get the opportunity to study the followings:

²Local Government Institutions and their structure ²Need for Local Government Institutions and their services provided to the community ²Duties to be fulfilled by the public for the maintenance of such services effectively ²Duties to be fulfilled with regard to the services to be provided by the public representatives and the government officers attached to the Local Government Institutions ²You will be able to analyse the contribution of the Local Government Institutions for the national development through regional development.

Local Government Institutions04

97For free distribution

4.1 Local Government Institutions

4.1.1 Identification of Local Government Institutions

It was a holiday. Achini’s father was reading the daily newspaper. Achinicame to him with a cup of tea. She looked at the paper her father was reading. A part of their conversation is as follows:

Achini-“Father, today’s paper carries a lot of information about Local Government Institutions, doesn’t it?”

Father-“Ah, yes, daughter. Both these pages describe Local Government Institutions.”

Achini-“Father, what are these Local Government Institutions?”

Father -These institutions have been set up to ease the administration of the region, and to fullfil the needs of the region.

Achini-That means these institutions have been set up for our own ease, haven't they?

Father-''Yes, Daughter, take your time and read this article leisurely. You will get to know a lot about Local Government Institutions.”

Having read the article published in the newspaper, Achini had summarized some important points as given below:

²Local Government Institutions function under the guidance of the Central Government. ²Local Government Institutions in Sri Lanka function as Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and Provincial Councils. ²The Central Government has assigned the administrative affairs to the Local Government Institutions through various Acts. ²The 13th amendment to the 1978 constitution empowers the Provincial Council to supervise the administration of the Local Government Institutions. ²The structure of a Local Government Institution consists of the members elected by the public vote and of the government officers. ²Local Government Institutions are bound to follow the instructions issued by the Central Government as well as the Provincial Council. ²Under the democratic ruling system, Local Government Institution contribute to maintain the administrative affairs of the Central Government more easily and to operate welfare services more closely to the public. ²Local Government Institutions provide an immense service to regional development.

98For free distribution

It can be simply defined that the special institutions which are operative to maintain community services, easily and efficiently, in the urban semi - urban and rural levels are called Local Government Institutions.

Activity 4.1

1. Construct a simple definition to introduce Local Government Institutions.2. Name the Local Government Institution which belongs to your living area/ your school.

4.1.2 Necessity of the Local Government Institutions

The main purpose of a Local Government Institutions is to maintain public services efficiently and fruitfully. Study the chart given below to identify the necessity of the Local Government Institutions:

Easy administration of regional administrative affairs through decentralizing Central Government's affairsActing suitably to match the regional requirements

Expansion of democratic ruling up to the regional level

Expansion of youth participation in political leadership

Ability to build up future political leaders through regional level

Easy preparation of national policies based on regional policies

Easy maintenance of community services methodically

Accelerating national development through regional development

Ability to act quickly in emergency situations

NECESSITY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS

99For free distribution

4.1.3 Historical evolution of Local Government

Inception of the present Local Government Institutions of Sri Lanka commenced during the British ruling system. History bears evidence that the concept of regional administration existed in Sri Lanka, long ago.

With the introduction of a plantation economy by the British, they needed to develop infrastructure (eg: roads, exchange of messages). Increase in the population,urbanization and the increase in the provision of social benefits to the public, were the other reasons contributed towards to form formal Local Government Institutions during British period.

As such, the regulations brought in by the British, affect the birth of Local Government Institutions and their gradual development.

Some regulations brought in by the British are as follows:

²Establishment of Municipal Councils in 1865 A.D. in Colombo, Kandy and Galle under the Municipal Council Ordinance No. 17 ²Establishment of Village Councils in 1871 A.D. under the Village Council Ordinance No. 26 ²Establishment of Town Councils in 1940 A.D. under the Town Council Ordinance No. 61 ²Establishment of Urban Councils in 1946 AD under the Ordinance No. 03

The first Municipal Councils in Sri Lanka

Municipal Council in Colombo Municipal Council in GalleMunicipal Council in Kandy

100For free distribution

After the independence, the following Local Government Institutions were functioned in Sri Lanka;

1. Village Councils2. Rural Councils3. Urban Councils4. Municipal Councils

In the year 1980, By the regulation No. 35:

²abolished Village and Rural Councils and established District Development Councils and, ²established village based councils and divisional based councils to promote more participation in District Development Councils.

Regulation No. 15 of 1987 abolished the District Development Councils and established Provincial Councils.

Accordingly, after 1987, in Sri Lanka, ²Pradeshiya Sabhas ²Urban Councils and ²Municipal Councils are under operation.

Activity 4.2

Prepare an article for a wall newspaper on, “Changes that took place in the local administration of Sri Lanka after independence.”

101For free distribution

Local Government Institutions function in Sri Lanka as at 01.05.2017

ProvinceDistrictMunicipal Councils

Urban CouncilsTotalPradeshiya Sabha

Total 2341271335

Northern

JaffnaMannarVavuniyaMulativuKilinochchi

01----

030101--

1304040403

1705050403

EasternBatticaloaAmparaTrincomalee

0102-

020102

091711

122013

UvaBadullaMoneragala02-01-15101810

North CentralAnuradhapuraPolonnaruwa01---18071907

Sabaragamuwa RatnapuraKegalle01-020114111712

CentralKandyMataleNuwara Eliya

010201

04-02

171105

221308

WayambaKurunegalaPuttalam

01-010219102112

SouthernGalleMataraHambantota

010101

020101

171510

201712

WesternColomboGampahaKalutara

0502-

050504

031212

131916

102For free distribution

4.1.4 Structure of Local Government Institutions

Local Government Institutions are inclusive of both the representatives of the public and the government officials. A board of officers, including government officials, has been formed to fulfil the affairs of such institutes efficiently and fruitfully. Some basic features of the structure of a Local Government Institution are as follows:

²The person in-charge of the Local Government Institution is a representative of the public. ²Conducting administrative affairs is done by the government officers ²Decisions regarding the Local Government Institution are taken by the public representatives.

Heads of Local Government Institutions

InstitutionMunicipal CouncilUrban Council/Pradeshiya SabhaChief MayorPresidentAssistantDeputy MayorVice PresidentAdministrative officer Municipal CommissionerSecretary

Designation

Structure of the representatives of the public and the government officers in different Local Government Institutions are as follows:

Structure of a Pradeshiya Sabha

Vice Chairman (Public representative)

Chairman (Public Representative)

Representatives of the Public(Public Representation)

Government officials

Secretary

Other officials

Eg: Technical officers Management Assistants Drivers/minor staff/labourers

103For free distribution

Structure of a Urban Council

Vice chairman (Representative of the Public)

Chairman (Representative of the Public)

Representatives of the Public(Members of Urban Councils)

Government officials

Secretary

Other officials

Eg: Technical Officers Management Assistants Drivers/Minor staff/Labourers

This basic structure can vary based on different urban councils. Structure of a Municipal Council

MayorRepresentative of the Public

Deputy MayorRepresentative of the public

Representative of the public(Members of Urban Council)

Government officers

Municipal Commissioner

Other officials

Eg: Technical Officers Management Assistants Drivers/Minor staff/Labourers

104For free distribution

1. Draw the structure of the Local Government Institution which your school/home belongs to.2. Compare the structure of the Local Government Institution of your area you drew, with the structure given in the textbook.

Activity 4.3

Responsibilities of the Head of a Local Government Institution:

1. To convene and postpone the council 2. To preside over the council 3. To take the initiative to provide the needs of the people 4. To organize and conduct activities related to the Local Government Institution

²An officer of Sri Lanka Administrative Service is appointed by the Governor of the relevant Provincial Council as the Municipal Commissioner in a Municipal Council. ²An officer of the Super Grade, in the State Management Service is appointed, as the Secretary to the Urban Council/ Pradesheeya Sabha, by the Public Services Commission.

When the term of a council ends, the respective Municipal Commissioner or the Secretary carries on with the conduct of the responsibilities of the council until the next election. Otherwise, administrative authorities are entrusted to a special officer.

Local Government Institutions are given various powers to carry out their responsibilities. Given below are a few examples of them:

²Imposing Assessment Taxes and other related taxes ²Issuing street markings certificates ²Approving building plans ²Permitting the construction of permanent buildings and other structures ²Dismantling unauthorized structures ²Initiating activities to preserve the environment ²Constructing public roads, canals, public markets, dispensaries, libraries, gardens and maintaining them

105For free distribution

²Carrying out necessary action to eradicate infectious diseases ²Removing unauthorized slums, huts and other structures harmful to health ²Maintaining ownership of natural streams and reservoirs Proper execution of the above mentioned powers ensure the public welfare and the development of the area. Finances that are required to be spent for the multi services launched by the Local Government Institutions are earned in various ways.

Ways of earning Financial Resources by the Local Government Institutions

²Assessment taxes/Tax finance ²Grants from the Minister of Local Government to the Local Government Institutions ²Money earned through Leasing/Renting out of properties attached to the Local Government Institutions. (Eg - Town halls, boutiques, shops, etc.) ²Revenue collected from the supply of public services ²Allocations from fines imposed by magistrate’s courts over violating laws ²Donations and Aids from foreign governments and Non-Governmental Organizations, with the approval of the Parliament of Sri Lanka

Electing representatives for Local Government Institutions

²So far, representatives were elected by the votes of the relevant region on proportional representation. Amendments to the election of Local Government Institute Ordinance No. 22 of 2012 has now been approved. Accordingly, procedure for the representation of Local Government Institutions at an election is scheduled to be changed.

²In accordance with that, it is suggested that the representatives will be elected on individual representation and proportional representation, based on the electorate level.

Delimitation of Local Government Institutions

Limitations to the Local Government Institutions are decided by a National Committee on Limitations. Accordingly, criteria that are taken into consideration at the limitations of Local Government Institutions are listed below:

106For free distribution

²Population ratio to suit different nationalities ²The geography and physical features ²Population and the Density of the population ²Level of economic development

According to the limitations decided on Local Government Authority areas, map of the Colombo District Local Government Authority area is shown below;

1. Having discussed with the teacher, present a short report of details, on the procedure of the election of representatives to the Local Government Institutions.2. Is proportional representation the more suitable approach to select members to Local Government Institutions? OR Is a combination of a member for each division and proportional representation better? Arrange for a debate. Be guided by your teacher.

Activity 4.4

107For free distribution

4.2 Services offered by the Local Government Institutions

Under the subject Civic Education, students of Grade 9 were expected to learn that day about ''The services offered by the Local Government Institutions.'' Having accepted the invitation given by the Class Teacher, an officer in the Pradesheeya Sabha, Mr. Anil had come to the class on time to discuss details of the topic. A part of the discussion Mr. Anil had, with the students in the classroom, on the services fulfilled by the Local Government Institution is given below:

Reading hall

Library service

Local Government Institutions offer many services to the residents of the areas and specially for students. Maintaining public libraries and reading rooms, children’s parks, passageways for walking and jogging, etc. can be taken as examples.Local Government Institutions also conduct pre-school services.They also contribute to launch religious and cultural programmes with a common value.

Mr Anil:

Passage ways for walking

Children's park

108For free distribution

A pre - school

Are the roads too repaired by the Local Government Institutions?Fathima: (student)

Mr Anil:Services such as road repairs, construction of bridges and culverts and construction of new roads that belong to the Local Government authority areas are fulfilled by them. Street lighting is also attended by the Local Government Institutions.

Regional road maintenance

What are the other services provided by the Local Government Institutions?Sandareka: (student)

Providing health and sanitation is a major responsibility of a Local Government Institution. Under this topic the institution attends to the maintenance of proper drainage and sewage services, maintenance of drains and canals, maintenance of public toilets, etc. They are all valuable services.

Mr Anil:

Yes. Management of waste is a very important service carried out by Local Government Institutions. They attend to proper disposal of waste and operation of projects for recycling.

Mr Anil:

Isn’t the waste disposal a service carried out by Local Government Institutions?

Amila:(student)

Sewage Services

Collecting garbage for re - cycling

109For free distribution

Don’t the Local Government Institutions check the sale of unhygienic food?Ravi:

Why not? Oh yes. Thank you very much for reminding that. Not only the sale of unhygienic food, the Local Government Institutions also act against advertising of such food. There are many more services offered by the Local Government Institutions. Maintenance of public cemetery, maintenance of public bathing wells and crematoriums, the supply of water based on the regional needs, are some other responsibilities of the Local Government Institutions. Services provided as fire extinguishing are also fulfilled by the Local Government Institutions.

Mr Anil:

Public well

Fire extinguishing service

There was a clinic organized in our village by the Pradesheeya Sabha.Malithi:

Yes, eye clinics, clinics for infants and pregnant mothers, programmes to control the spread of infections diseases like dengue and clinics for the control of non-communicable diseases are some other programmes provided by the Local Government Institutions. They also maintain ayurvedic dispensaries. Not only that but social security programmes for the elders are also conducted.

Mr Anil:

Programme to eradicate dengue

110For free distribution

Clinics for pregnant mothers

A rural medical clinic

Local Government Institutions attend to the development of water supply and small irrigation canals towards economic development. Not only that, programmes are also conducted to preserve the environment by the Local Government Institutions.

Mr Anil:

Are there any other programmes for the development of the area by the Local Government Institutions?Achini: (student)

The monitor of the class, Asitha thanked Mr. Anil for the explanation of the services given regarding the Local Government Institutions so well. His speech went like this:

We did not know the Local Government Institutions do such a big service. You explained the services from the Local Government Institutions so well. Local Government Institutions contribute an immense service to maintain cleanliness of the environment and to ease our day - to - day activities on various occasions from our birth to death. It is now clear to us that all those working in Local Government Institutions provide a lot of services to us and the country. We are very happy about it. We wish to offer our gratitude and honour to you for holding such a friendly discussion and making us knowledgeable on the subject.

1. Discuss with your teacher how the following services extended by the Local Government Institutions in your area contribute to the development of human resources. ²Maintenance of libraries and reading rooms ²Maintenance of playgrounds ²Conducting of medical clinics2. Propose a series of programmes to your Local Government Institution that can be done towards prevention and control of dengue.

Activities 4.5

111For free distribution

4.3 Duties of the public towards the services given by the Local Government Institutions

The public has the right to get the maximum use of the services provided by the Local Government Institutions and to enhance their living conditions. As well, it is the duty of the recipients of such services to fulfil their duties in return effectively for those services.

Given below are a few examples of duties the public (recipients) has to attend to: ²Payment of due taxes without delay ²Prompt payment of bills for the services provided ²Adhering to the instructions given by the Local Government Institutions regarding the management of waste and other disposables in a suitable manner ²Maintaining a clean environment and contributing towards environmental preservation ²Safeguarding public property and economical use of such property ²Obtaining legal approval for constructions ²Working co-operatively with the public representatives and officers attached to the Local Government Institutions ²Make the public representatives and the officers aware of the regional needs ²Informing breakdowns of services and maintenance work on emergency situations

4.4 Responsibilities and duties of public representatives and government officers towards services offered by the Local Government Institutions

This chapter made you aware of the services supplied by Local Government Institutions towards welfare of the public. Both public representatives and government officers attached to the Local Government Institutions need to attend to their responsibilities and duties in a responsible manner. Such an attitude is essential towards an efficient service.

112For free distribution

Responsibilities and duties of the representatives of the public and the government officials

Responsibilities duties

²Identifying resources in the area ²Understanding the needs and the problems of the public ²Identifying strategic plans for development ²Assisting with the preparation of plans ²Considering requirements in making decisions ²Looking into programmes being acted on ²Acting on rules and regulations given ²Providing leadership ²Taking action against forgery, corruption and bribery ²Preventing misuse of public property and government services ²Supervising development activities as required ²Fulfilling the responsibilities entrusted, properly

²Paying attention to the grievances of the public ²Maintaining close relationship with the public ²Attending meetings/ Taking part in meeting ²Preventing forgery, bribery and corruption ²Commitment towards the betterment of the public ²Being honest ²Making the institution an attractive place for the public ²Fulfilling the public needs effectively ²Avoiding the misuse of state property and government services ²Providing a service of high standard

Column 1 Column 11Duties of public representatives and government officials Procedures that should be followed in fulfilling daily services/ dutiesMaintain close relationship with the publicFulfilling of public needs efficientlyAvoid misuse of government property Commitment to serve for the welfare of the public

Activity 4.6

Given below, in column 1 in the table, are some duties a people’s representative/government official has to attend to. Fill column 11 with the procedure to follow in fulfilling of duties.

113For free distribution

4.5 Contribution of the Local Government Institutions towards the national development

The utmost result of a regional development process is the social, economicand cultural development of a country which takes place as the overall development. Maintaining a balance with the environment is essential in the implementation of all development activities. Regional development is directly associated with Local Government Institutions. A few examples regarding contributions from regional development towards national development are listed below;

i. Identifying regional needs and the resourcesii. Preparation of regional development plans through identifying the regional needs and the resourcesiii. Implementing plans properly iv. Producing regional leaders

A short description about each topic is given below:

i. Identifying regional needs and the resources

The needs of people that differ according to the place they live in are called regional needs. The following contribute to vary the requirements of regions:

²Distribution of resources ²Variety in culture ²Geographical background

Therefore, it is a strong responsibility of a Local Government Institution to identify the requirements for each region. A few examples related to regional needs are given below:

²Providing drinking water to those living in a dry zone region ²Proper waste disposal and management in the Urban areas ²Development of infrastructure in rural areas ²Providing recreational facilities to both urban and rural areas (library services, playgrounds, roadways for walking, children’s playgrounds, etc.) ²Providing houses to low income groups ²Street lighting ²Maintaining pre-schools to develop little children ²Taking steps to control the spread of dengue in affected areas.

114For free distribution

ii. Preparation of regional development plans identifying the regional needs and the resources

Installing tube wells

Bowsers distributing water

Water supply

Procedure to be followed in preparing plans to supply water to drought-stricken areas

Examples:

²Identify suitable catchment areas for the supply of water to areas with a shortage of drinking water

²Investigate the possibility to supply water from the national water supply

²Prepare action plans to find the necessary finances for the water supply scheme

²Get technical assistance

Garbage disposal

Waste Management

²Supply containers and give instructions to prepare compost manure with household leftovers ²Arrange to sort out garbage before disposal ²Supply waste bins ²Collect garbage ²Arrange recycling programmes for garbage ²Prepare plans for the production of organic manure ²Make the public aware of their duties to dispose waste lawfully and in a decent manner

Control of Dengue

²Identify the areas likely to spread dengue in the region ²Propose suitable measures to clean or destroy vector mosquito breeding places ²Prepare plans for public participation in such programmes and to get the assistance from government/volunteer organizations/people of the region

115For free distribution

iii. Proper implementation of plans

It is the responsibility of representatives of the people and government officers in Local Government Institutions to see that these programmes meetexpected outcomes. At the same time, good supervision with such programmes will help provide better services to the community.

Examples:

²Supervision of regional road constructions/repairs to ensure the proper standards. ²Supervise to see whether both garbage collectors and the public keep to their duties properly in the management of garbage and when necessary they must be given advice.

iv. Producing regional leaders

The main factor to the success of a democratic system of government is an honest, efficient and noble political leadership. Regarding the regional administration in a democratic system of a government, Local Government Institutions which are given authority are also very closely attached to the public. Therefore, people who live in that area has a right to elect exemplary political leaders of the region with democratic qualities as the representations of Local Government Institutions. This is a very important responsibility the public enjoys.

Representatives, elected in that manner, need to do their work devotedly towards the public they serve to acquire knowledge about politics, experience and training. Introducing such remarkable leaders to national politics is a very important national service.

Following these procedures, Local Government Institutions can contribute immensely to build up a prosperous Sri Lanka.

1. List a few good qualities that you feel a candidate should have, in electing him for the Local Government Institution. 2. Prepare a list of daily activities that can be proceeded in preventing the spread of Dengue in your home garden/ school.3. Present your suggestions to manage garbage collected around your house.

Activity 4.7

116For free distribution

Summary

²Local Government Institutions are a set of special institutions which have been established by the Central Government to execute consumer services of people at regional level efficiently and successfully.

²Local Government Institutions are comprised of representatives of people and government officers.

²The concept of regional administration has existed in Sri Lanka from the ruling periods of kings.

²Expansion of the modern Local Government Institutions have commenced during the British rule.

²Laws enacted after independence have brought about changes to the system of Local Government.

²In Sri Lanka, there are now Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and Pradeshiya Sabhas function under Local Government Institutions.

²Local Government Institutions provide a lot of services to help ease and make better, the lives of the people.

²Fulfilling the duties and responsibilities played by people's representatives and officers attached to Local Government Institutions help to continue the same.

²It is highly important to fulfil the duties and responsibilities of the people in regard to the services provided by the Local Government Institution efficiently.

²Local Government Institutions are capable of providing a high contribution to succeed the strategies of the national development through regional development.

117For free distribution

Introduction

Society consists of a large number of people. They differ from one another. Such differences occur as a result of the differences of their opinions, beliefs, education and economy. In fact conflicts occur constantly due to such differences. As a result of conflicts there can be mental disturbances, stress, worries, violence and harmful social activities. Conflicts may occur within a person, among people, families, regions, countries as well as internationally. It is very important to resolve such conflicts peacefully for the existence of human society and to maintain sustainable peace in the society.

Studying this chapter you will be able to gain broader understanding about the followings:

²Defining conflicts ²Causes for conflicts ²Parties that involve in conflicts ²Different types of conflicts ²Qualities need for conflict resolution ²Methods of conflict resolution ²Advantages of conflict resolution in positive manner ²Repercussion of not resolving conflicts in a positive manner

Conflict Resolution05

118For free distribution

Defining conflicts

Given below are some of the views taken from a brain storming activity related to the lesson ''Conflicts'':

Conflicts occur due to our various beliefs as well as doubts within us

conflicts occur as a result of diversity in thoughts

Conflicts are created for getting resources and spreading ones power

Not respecting others mutually is the cause for conflicts

Yes, children, your ideas are very important. Let’s see how to define a conflict.

Conflicts occur due to impatienceconflicts occur not only among humans but also among animals

Conflicts occur due to vicious qualities such as anger, jealousy

Conflicts occur due to the influence of external people

119For free distribution

Defining conflicts

“A situation in which people, group or countries are involved in a serious disagreement or argument” Oxford dictionary

It is clear that a conflict occurs in various forms such as riot, quarrel, disagreement, argument, hitting or war.

Everybody has to face various types of conflicts in day to day life. Conflicts can occur within a person, among friends, relatives and neighbours. There can be conflicts among ethnic groups, political parties as well as religious groups. As a result of resolving conflicts in a positive manner, there can be new ideas, new creations and new relations.

If the conflicts are not resolved at the beginning, it will lead to a harmful condition. In fact it is important to resolve conflicts at the beginning otherwise it may destroy valuable human lives as well as the properties.

5.1 Causes for conflicts

Not being socializedSelfishness

Being invade

Being highly sensitive

Taking decisions without seeking alternatives

Different ideasSocial differencesImbalance of resources

Being aggressive

Desire to gain power

Being Uneducated

Causes for conflicts

120For free distribution

²Remind an instance where you had to face a conflict. Line up the reasons for that one by one. ²Write preventive steps that could have been taken to resolve that conflict.

Activity 5.1

Parties involved in conflicts ²Within one self ²Between two people ²Within a family ²Among neighbours (among people/families/groups of people) ²Within one State or between two States ²Among many States

Various conflicts

Conflicts in the country can be categorized according to the nature of them.

Examples -

²Conflicts based on politics

Conflicts related to boundaries can be cited as examples. There are conflicts between India and Kashmeer for a long time.

²Conflicts based on economy

These conflicts are created due to many economic reasons such as obtaining resources, poverty, capturing the market or broadening market. The conflict between Irac and Quate for mineral oil can be cited as examples.

²Conflict based on society

Conflicts created due to various opinion among people/group of people/among countries/religious groups or racial groups are some examples.

121For free distribution

Write an article to a newspaper about the danger of the conflicts of the world to the human society.

Activity 5.2

5.2 Issues arising in conflict resolution

There can be various issues when resolving conflicts. Some examples are given below:

²Rigidity ²Stick to one’s opinion ²Stick to one’s solution ²Not seeking alternatives ²No involvement of all the parties in conflict resolution ²Thinking of winning by defeating others ²One party is trying to win ignoring the opinion and needs of the other parties The major issue of conflict resolution is the rigidity of both parties involved in the conflict. The story given below tells us such situation:

Amindu and kavindu are Grade 9 students. They are classmates. Teacher wanted to appoint a monitor. Both Amindu and Kavindu wanted to be the monitor. But the teacher said that only one could be the monitor the other could be the vice. But both of them wanted to get the leadership and they stuck to that opinion. As a result teacher was unable to appoint a monitor.

Major obstacle for conflict resolution is that they stick to one opinion. The story given below proves that:

122For free distribution

Sandakirani and Prabashvara are siblings. One day there was a conflict situation over a TV programme. One liked to watch a cartoon and the other liked to watch a cricket match. Both tried to watch their programme at once. There, a conflict occurred. Father resolved the conflict at the end.

Conflicts occur at different levels as parties that involved in conflicts stick to one option, Another cause for conflicts is that they do not seek alternatives, they will be able to solve the problems easily.

² Watching programmes in different periods ² Watching programmes a week after week ² Watching programmes using the internet ² Watching another programme during that time

Select a country or a party that leads to conflicts. Study it and discuss the obstacles of conflict resolution.

Activity 5.3

Qualities needed for conflict resolution

²Patience ²Active listening ²Kindness ²Friendliness ²Ability to make decisions ²Expressive ability ²Controlling emotions

²Respecting other's views ²Generosity ²Unbiased nature ²Respecting every body ²Fair judgement ²Respecting rights ²Fulfilling duties

Suitable methods of conflict resolution

There are many accepted methods of conflict resolution. Some examples are given below:

123For free distribution

Discussion The most simple method of conflict resolution is discussion. Conflict resolution is done by the parties involved through discussions. There, the both parties can succeed in coming to “win – win” solution.

Involvement Involvement is used to assist two persons or two groups or two countries to settle a conflict when the discussion method is failed. This is a peaceful process. Persons who are accepted by both parties or external parties can be used for this purpose.Situations where involvement can be used:

²Family conflicts ²Among groups of students ²Among ethnic groups ²Among countries

Mediation Mediation can be introduced as another method of resolving a conflict of disagreement. Conciliation is done by a board consists of mediators. The main feature of mediation is that both the parties leading towards discussion to resolve their conflicts. The Mediation Boards have been established by the Ministry of Justice for Mediation.

Examples for some conflicts that can be resolved by Mediation Boards are given below;

²Family conflicts ²Minor offences ²Conflicts among groups of people

Inquiry Inquiry is a judiciary process. The parties involved in the conflict are advised to come to a settlement at first and if it fails, the conflict is settled by a legal inquiry. The verdict of the judiciary is final and the loser can appeal to a higher court of law.

Counselling Counseling is directing towards conflict resolution by giving advice and guiding, while providing facilities in various ways. Here making two parties aware of benefits of positive conflict resolution and the consequences of conflicts, and directing them to mitigate the conflicts are done.

124For free distribution

Observe how Mediation Board in your area resolves a conflict. Then prepare a short report on conflict resolution.

Activity 5.4

5.3 Advantages of positive conflict resolution

The members brings up in such environment also exhibit unrest and violence. Therefore, resolving family conflicts then and there results peace at home as well as in the society. Many countries and social groups conflicts each other nationally and internationally due to racial, religious, civil wars etc. It is important to resolve conflicts positively avoiding loss of life and property and being refugees.

Establishment of peace

Some advantages of positive conflict resolution are given below:

²Establishment of peace - Whenever a conflict occurs, peace breaks. When a conflict occurs in mind, internal peace breaks. In the some way that the conflicts occur between two people, among people, in the family among different people in the society break peace. Resolving conflicts in a positive manner establishes peace. In fact positive conflict resolution is essential for the establishment of peace. This is important for oneself personally as well as for the society commonly.

²Personal and social development - Conflicts always bring personal and social deterioration of development. In fact positive conflict resolution causes for personal and social development.

²Political stability - Generally conflicts damage the political stability of a country. The state of political instability has severe negative impact on a country. In fact positive conflict resolution causes for political stability.

²Minimizing waste of resources - Large amount of resources waste due to conflicts. There is a waste of physical, human resources and time. Hence it is very important to have positive conflict resolution for minimizing or avoiding wastage of resources.

125For free distribution

Some more advantages of positive conflict resolution are given below. Discuss these factors with the teacher.

²Confidence building ²Minimizing mental stress ²Safeguard personal respect ²Building friendliness ²Developing social relations ²Developing cultural integrity ²Protection of human rights specially child rights and women rights ²Avoiding damages of lives/ property ²Widening of international relations ²Increasing the arrival of investors

Consequences of not resolving conflicts positively

As not resolving conflicts positively, there is a negative impact on people as well as society. Consequences of not solving conflicts using win - win method are given below:

²Mental stress ²Being unpopular ²Having mutual suspicion and distrust ²Breaking down social relations ²Increasing unnecessary problems and expenditure ²Destruction of resources ²Breaking down in peace

Widen your knowledge by discussing the above factors with your teacher, friends and elders.

Positive conflict resolution is equally important for all the parties involved. Advantages of positive conflict resolution can be considered as common factors for everybody. At the same time the consequences of not resolving conflicts positively can have negative impact on all the parties. In fact the parties involved should do positive conflict resolution honestly and dedicatedly. By now you have understood the impact on personal development as well as social development. Positive conflict resolution causes for social peace and harmony not only that it helps to develop social co-existence, reconciliation, brotherhood and freedom. By means of that, the way is paved for the entire social peace. Children, let’s forget all the disagreements and stand for peace. That is our duty today.

126For free distribution

²Conflicts occur within one self among people, groups and among countries.

²Conflicts occur due to various reasons and they develop.

²Conflicts are categorized basically based on the roots of conflicts as political, economic and social conflicts.

²In conflict resolution, there are a lot of challenges. Facing challenges bravely resulted successful conflict resolution.

²In conflict resolution, an individual must develop a large number of attributes, personally as well as socially.

²Some examples of effective conflict resolution methods are discussion, mediation and counseling.

²Positive conflict resolution paves the way for peace as well as it is beneficial for the person and the society.

²Consequences of not resolving conflicts positively have to be faced by everybody and it causes for the breaking of peace, co-existence, reconciliation equity and sustainable peace of the society.

Summary

127For free distribution

Major responsibility of education today is to offer good citizens to the society. The aim of education in schools should also be to offer a useful person to the society. Education should offer the school children the necessary guidance to face the future world of work successfully. For this, it is necessary to provide facilities throughout the entire curriculum of the school.

To win the world of work:

² Selection of future job opportunities² Fulfilling the required qualifications for job/career expectation are important To fulfill such expectations, the study of this chapter will be of vital importance. By study this chapter you will be able to understand the following:

²Identifying the available professions/jobs/careers in the world of work ²Selecting a job/career having identified your skills/capabilities ²Preparation of job application forms and CV (Curriculum Vitae) ²Developing the skill of facing an interview ²Working efficiently and co-operatively in the place of work ²Maintaining balance between your profession/work/career and personal life ²Managing/preforming/handling one's own affairs, with a sound financial management

Revise the lessons in Grade 8, your have learnt about the world of work.

World of Work06

128For free distribution

6.1 Maintaining a personal profile

The figure below makes clear that there is a social as well as personal value of every job or career.

Jobs/careers in the world of work

Before you consider a job, it is important to evaluate your own capabilities, skills and preference. You may have different talents. You are the only person who is well aware of them. In the selection of a field of career, your own choice will be more important than one selected under the influence of the others. Therefore, maintaining a personal profile, including your personal qualities, skills and desires will be useful in search of a job in future.

When the teacher inquired the children about the things that should be included in a personal profile, the following are some answers given by them;

Saman -Teacher, it should have personal information as name, date of birth, address, number of birth certificate, term test marks of previous years, certificates achieved, details of awards, names of parents, their occupations, telephone numbers, etc.

129For free distribution

Nimali -Teacher, I think our personal qualities should also be included.Fareed -What are they Nimali?Nimali -Dedication, tolerance, determination, courage to face challenges

Nazeefa-What about our skills teacher?Teacher-Yes, tell us.Nazeefa-Communication skills, leadership, ability to work together, to write, to sing, self-performance.Kadireshani-Yes, not only that, our additional qualifications should also be included. Certificates obtained in singing, debating, sports at school level and outside can also be included. Teacher-Yes, very good. Now isn't it clear that many things about you can be included in the personal file? Maintaining a personal file of this nature will be quite useful for any person's future.

Considering the answers of the students, the teacher has summarized the facts that are to be included in a personal file. She put them on the black board as follows:

1. Personal Information ²Name ²Address ²Telephone number ²Date of birth ²Age ²Educational qualifications

2. Personal qualities ²Dedication ²Pleasantness ²Friendliness ²Generosity ²Expressing ideas directly

3. Personal skills ²Aesthetic skills ²Sports skills ²Driving skills ²Language skills

4. Personal behaviour ²Sociability ²Ability to work alone ²Ability to work as a team ²Sharing

5. Experience at school ²Class monitor /Prefect ²Cadet ²Scout ²Vehicle pioneer ²Environmental pioneers

6. Experience outside the school ²Participating in shramdana campaign ²Participating in disaster management activities ²Assisting services in Elderly Homes, children orphanages ²Welfare activities of students ²Working in various societies/ organizations

130For free distribution

Let us see the importance of maintaining a personal file:

²To know about the capabilities and incapabilities ²To understand preferences ²To understand weaknesses and to avoid them ²To understand the skills that are to be developed ²To establish self esteem ²To get it helped in selecting a job

Pay attention to the facts that are to be included in a personal file. Initiate an attractive personal file and take steps to maintain it.

Activity 6.1

6.2 Different professions and occupations in the world of work

World of work is also attractive as the natural world. Various professions are available there. Possessing a knowledge of various professions in the world of work is very important. This will be very helpful to you, when selecting a suitable profession of your choice in future.

Various fields of occupations available in the world of work are shown below:

Social welfare services

Occupations in the State and private sector

Employer based employments

Self-employments

Voluntary employments

State or private sector jobs

One's own jobs

Jobs initiated and continued by oneselfEmployee based employments

Teachers, doctors, labourers

Head of the institute Proprietor

Midwife, environmental guides

Taxi service, business activities

Teachers, Management Assistants

Dhamma School Teachers, Voluntary teachers of schools

Jobs aiming to provide social service

Employees as workers of an institute

Jobs done without a profit motive

Various professions and employments

131For free distribution

Employments can be categorized according to the place of work.

²Domestic/indoor employments - Engage in offices, shops, factories, etc.

²Outdoor employments - Farming, road construction, construction work, etc.

²Employments in fixed locations - In factories, in offices, in shops

²Mobile employments - Hawkers sale of goods by traveling, etc.

132For free distribution

Have you seen some indigenous physicians treating free of charge? They value self-satisfaction more than money. Even in paid occupations if we work with pleasure, without limiting our service to money, it will be beneficial to the country, as well as to you.

For continuous existence of society, it is essential to supply various Jobs and services. Therefore, every job is important to the society equally. Every employment has some value and dignity and acceptance at a high or low level. As some think, it is not suitable to categorize employments as high ranking or low, the reason being that every job is equally required by the society. It is clear that some are tempted to categorize occupations on the basis of quantity of labour spent, expected income or social status. But you may realize that such categorization is not suitable or necessary.

Study job vacancies/advertisements in a week-end paper. Select and entre them in the relevant column in the given three columns.

Activity 6'2

Self-employmentsPrivate sector employmentsGovernment sector employments

6.3 Pathways for different employments

There are different pathways to enter a profession or an occupation. It should be selected to suit and realize future hopes and goals. Thereby your educational activities can be easily planned to suit the world of work. Your personal abilities, preferences and skills should be considered. Some examples for such occasions are given below:

²Selection of subject streams in the school

You who are studying in Grade 9 this year will enter Grade 10 next year. There are six core-subjects and three basket subjects for you to select. On such an occasion, there are some facts to be considered. For example, your ability to study those subjects, desire and the connection with the future world of work are some of

133For free distribution

them. Similarly, when selecting basket subjects, whatever the job you aim at, special attention should be paid on Civic Education, a subject, which develops attitudes, skills and knowledge to live as a good citizen. The reasons for that is at present, or in future, in whatever job you are engaged in, value of humanity stands above all.

Having passed the G. C. E. Ordinary Level examination, when you go to the G. C. E. Advanced Level class, there are some streams like Science, Mathematics, Vocational/Technical subjects, Commerce and Arts. In such a situation, selection of the stream and subjects should be done to your expectations.

Science stream

Mathematicalstream

Commerce stream

Art stream

Technical subject stream

A/L subjectsExamples of available jobs/professions

Medical, dentistry, Administration service, laboratory technicians, nursing, teaching, etc.

Engineering, computer or electrical engineering, Administration service, Draftsman, etc.

Managers, Administration service, Accountants, Accounts clerks, Businessman, assessors, teachers etc.

Computing, motor mechanism, electricians, machine repairing, teaching, etc.

Administration service, lawyers, teaching, supply of services, Clerical, Salesman, teaching profession, etc.

According to the above table, it will be clear to you that attention should be paid on the fields of jobs. Selection of subject streams should be done on your own will and ability and not on the wants and desires of the others. This will be more useful for your future.

²Academic/ Professional qualifications

In the selection of a job, it is required to have academic and vocational qualifications.

G.C.E. (O/L) G.C.E. (A/L) Diploma (example: Music, Agriculture, etc.)Degree (Science, Arts, Commerce, Technology, etc.)

Academic qualifications -

134For free distribution

Qualifications related to the job engaging at present or to be engaged in future.Example: Diploma for teaching profession,Training in Teachers' Colleges, Bachelor of educationPostgraduate Diploma in Education

Professional qualifications -

²Formal and in-service job training

In the world of work, persons with academic and professional qualifications, skilled and creative abilities have a great demand. At present, there are various institutions and various courses for formal training for jobs. In Sri Lanka, to qualify for professions, the NVQ (National Vocational Qualification) has been introduced. Under this, short term, full time and diploma courses are conducted by the institutes like the National Youth Services Council. To obtain degrees, a Vocational University has also been established.

Institutions and courses for professional training are shown in the diagram below:

²Technical Colleges

²Vocational Training Centre

²National Apprenticeship Board

²Hotel School

²Nurses' Training Schools

²Agriculture Schools

²Technical Universities

²Law College

²Motor Mechanism

²Computer training

²Beauty culture

²Food processing (Culinary science)

²Electricians

²Draftsmen

²Nurses' Training

InstitutionsCourses

Professional training

²Vidatha Centers

In addition to above professions, pre-service and in-service training are given after recruitment as well as before recruitment.(Examples: Teaching profession, Operating machines, etc.)

135For free distribution

Get the students to collect information on institutions for professional training and exchange them with the other friends in the class.

Activity 6.3

There are many institutions to get information on professional courses:

²Department of Technical Education and Training ²National Apprenticeship Institute and Technical Training Authority ²Vocational Training Authority ²National Youth Council

Other than these, information on professional courses can be obtained from newspapers, gazettes and the Internet.

6.4 Required qualifications and experience for jobs professions

²Importance of selecting subject streams for jobs

Qualifications alone are not sufficient to do a job or a profession. For that, it is important to have experience too. Specially for professions like medical and law, it is compulsory to complete prior experience.

Specially as students, it is very important for you to select the subject stream to suit your career pathway. An extract from a speech made by a speaker, at a workshop held for students who have passed G. C. E. O/L examination in the selection of subject stream, is given below:

''You are now getting ready to overcome the second step. But, for that, it is important to select suitable subjects and suitable streams. First think of the job you are going to do in future. For example, if you wish to seek a job in the field of banking, what subject stream should you select? Isn't it the commerce stream that you should select?

Mentioned above is only one fact. In addition to that, what are the things that should be considered when selecting a subject stream?

136For free distribution

1. Whether the subject streams suit your skills

2. What are the other educational and training courses that could be followed through those subject streams?

3. Whether there are chances for higher education through the selected subject stream?

4. Whether there is a possibility to pursue studies in the selected subject stream in your school?

5. What would be the job opportunities in future on the selected subject stream?

If you can answer these questions successfully, you will be able to enter the world of work diligently in future. It will be clear to you that many students of the present day, select subject streams on the wish of the parents, as the other students do the same subjects or they can go to an urban school. So, can you see in society that there are many who fail examinations and unable to face life successfully?

Nimal -Teacher, are there any other needs to consider when selecting jobs?

Teacher -Yes, Nimal, besides subject streams, there are many other things. One is academic, timely, emotional and physical demandThamara -What does that mean teacher?

Teacher -For every job, there are special academic qualifications. Look at this table;

Occupation/ professionAcademic qualificationsTeaching professionDegree, passing A/LLegal professionDegree in LawMedical ProfessionMedical DegreeNursingPass in A/L Science streamFiled of Accountancy Pass in AAT, CIMA examinations

Teacher-Is it clear now?

Careemdeen -Yes teacher, but what is timely demand?

Teacher-It means, qualifications for various jobs may vary from time to time. At present, to be a clerk, a pass in A/L is sufficient. But later it may require a degree instead.

137For free distribution

Neranjan-Then what is physical and mental demand?Teacher-It means to do a job, there should be a good mental readiness and a good physical fitness. If physically disabled, a driver's job cannot be done. Can he?Ok, did you understand now? Then, when you go home today, refer to some papers and scrutinize job advertisements. Write down academic qualifications for five jobs.Kasun-Teacher, is it necessary to have a special experience for jobs?

Teacher-Yes, to be a teacher, a special training is necessary. A relevant degree and a professional training is essential. For example, we can cite training in a College of Education or Post Graduate Diploma. For the job of a driver, it needs a special experience. For occupations like motor vehicle repairing, house-wiring, medical profession, a practical training is made compulsory. Further, a different exceptional courses also can be followed. For instance a clerk can follow a Computer Science Course and earn additional income.

Have you seen advertisements published for jobs? Newspapers, gazette notifications, Internet, and websites are mostly used as media for this purpose. Other than those banners and notices and handbills are also used.

In the past, the easiest way of getting vocational training was from family members. Agriculture, fishing and carpentry are examples.

A child doing agriculture with father A child doing carpentry work with father You also may have similar experiences. You too can get vocational training and knowledge from the employments of the family members. It does not mean that the same job of parents should be followed. But you can get the initial training and valuable experience by that, to do a job. Also you will have the self-esteem of your capability to do something.

It may be clear to you now educational qualifications and experience have equal importance in doing a job.

138For free distribution

Activity 6.4

Experience RequiredJobOne year experience in a reputed institute.

.........................................

Pass in G. C. E. O/L, Having followed a Technical course

............................................

1. Electrician

2.

Examine the job vacancies available in newspapers, gazettes and Internet.

6.5 Preparing a Curriculum Vitae

Curriculum Vitae is forwarded, when applying for a job. The word Curriculum Vitae. Which is derived from Latin, means a record of life routine. Curriculum Vitae can be identified as a complete personal profile.

Gazette notification for job vacancy

139For free distribution

Website

Handbill

Paper advertisement

There are 3 main ways for us to respond to a job advertisement

1. By a bio-data from

2. By a job application

3. By a letter

Next, let us examine how Curriculum Vitae is prepared.

It is important to prepare your Curriculum Vitae to be prominent and attractive. It should not be too long, but should contain all the essential information. Following information has been indicated to show the importance of a proper Curriculum Vitae by Bright and Earl, 2001.

Competitive Examination for the Recruitment of Graduates to Grade 3 - 1 (a) of Sri Lanka Teachers’ Service for the Vacancies Existing in G. C. E. (A/L) Sinhala, Tamil and English Medium Teaching in National Schools – 2017

VACANCY

140For free distribution

²At present a Curriculum Vitae has become an essential thing for everybody.

²Ability to get a complete picture of you from your Curriculum Vitae.

²Your intention should be to make the Curriculum Vitae attractive from the others.

²There is a competition in the job market at present.

²It minimizes the nuisance of time and job expectation.

iuka Èidkdhl

fkd' 10" wr,sh Whk"

wkqrdOmqr'

ÿ'w' 0112555762

Bfï,a ( ghnjsa@gmail.com

mrud¾:h

wOHdmk iqÿiqlï

^1& w'fmd'i' ^W$fm<& úNd.h ^2009&

úIhh fY%aKsh

^2& w'fmd'i' ^id$fm<& úNd.h ^2006&

úIhh fY%aKsh

jD;a;suh $ fjk;a iqÿiqlï

1&

2&

3&

cdhdrEmh

Saman Disanayaka

No.20.Araliya Uyana

Anuradhapura

Email - ghnisa@gmail.com

Aim

1. G.C.E. (A/L)

Professional/other qualifications

Subject

Subject

Grade

Grade

2. G.C.E. (O/L)

Photo

Educational qualifications

Date

úIh ndysr l%shdldrlï

1&

2&

3&

fm!oa.,sl f;dr;=re

 iïmQ¾K ku (

 uq,l=re iuÕ ku (

 ,smskh (

 Wmka Èkh (

 ia;%S$mqreI Ndjh (  újdyl$ wújdyl nj (  cd;sh (  mdi, (

úuish yels fofofkla ^{d;Ska fkdjk&

1& 2&

by; i|yka f;dr;=re udf.a ±kqug mokïj i;H yd ksjerÈ njg iy;sl fjñ'

…………………. …………………….

w;aik Èkh

Extra curricular activities

Personal Information

Full name :

Name with initials :Address :Date of Birth :Gender :Civil Status :

School :

Two non-related

Signature

I here by certify that the above information are to the best of my knowledge true and accurate

Nationality :

Date

Shown below is an example of features that could be included in a Curriculum Vitae;

Personal information

Name, address, city, country, telephone number, e-mail address, date of birth, citizenship, gender, civil status, particulars of children etc.

141For free distribution

Educational qualifications

School education, higher educational institutions, certificates obtained, (including institution, year, standard of the certificate)

Professional qualifications (relevant experience)

Relevant experience for the job, special skills for that, etc.

Previous job details

Institutes, job duration, designation, trainings, scholarships and achievements of the previous work place, if a job had been done.

Skills

Sports skills, aesthetic skills, writing skills, skills in language proficiency, etc.

Awards achieved

Awards achieved (if any) on your special skills/aptitudes, achievements (special medals, patent rights, etc.)

Publications

Articles, books, research reports, (if any) published by you.

Professional membership

If you have held posts in other professional organizations, particulars of them posts held in social organizations, particulars of membership.

Qualities

Dedication on entrusted responsibilities, tolerance, and friendliness, generosity, etc are examples.

Hobbies and preferences

These can be mentioned very briefly.

(Non-related referees)

It is necessary to name two persons, who are not your close relatives. Their names, telephone numbers, addresses and posts, etc. should be given.

142For free distribution

Let us prepare an attractive Curriculum Vitae

When entering into the world of work, a keen competition can be seen. Therefore, your Curriculum Vitae profile should be attractive and prominent, out of other profiles. The diagram below shows a few facts regarding the preparation of such a Curriculum Vitae profile.

State the required information clearly and accurately

Include a clear photograph

State information, the special skills and achievements

State all particulars about you

State the professional qualifications, and experience, related to the job applying for

State the experience related to the job applied

Cleanliness

Attractive finishing

Should be short and simple

Include only true particulars

Prepare your Curriculum Vitae, including your particulars. Attach it to the personal file you have prepared earlier.

Activity 6.5

6.6 Completing a job application form correctly

The following is an extract of a discussion between two Grade 8 students

Shameera-Nimal do you know that my brother fills in applications for jobs everyday?

Nimal-Oh! what's it? My brother too is the same. But so far, not a single interview called for.

143For free distribution

Shameera-My brother says he doesn't know if his way of filling in applications is correct. He says that may be the reason for not calling interviews for him. Nimal:-There our teacher is coming. Let us ask how to fill in an application form.

²How to fill a job application

Sometimes, a model application form for a job is supplied along with the advertisement. Some application forms can be bought from the market. Similarly, in some job advertisements, instructions are given to send an application written in one's own hand-writing. In such an instance, it is quite essential to prepare a rough copy of the job application. Let us first see the importance of preparing such a rough copy of the job application.

Importance of filing in a rough copy of an application

Avoid shortcomings when writing an application once

Remove unnecessary information, if written

Check all the information to be included

Prepare an application accurately, with a clear finishing

Get corrections done by another

Get a clear understanding of the space given and how to prepare the job application

Retain a copy of the qualification with you

144For free distribution

Application for the post of temporary driver Global Link corporation

1. Name with initials :2. Initials stand for :3. Permanent Address :4. Permanent district :5. Gender :6. Date of birth : year : month : Date :7. Age as on the final date of submitting application :8. Citizenship by generation or registration :9. Civil status : 10. National Identity Card Number :11. Telephone Number : 12. Educational Qualifications : 13. Professional and other qualifications :14. Service experience :15. If being accused at court, explain the punishment

I certify hereby the information given above are true and accurate. If these, information are found inaccurate, I will become ineligible before appointing and if such found after appointing the service will be terminated.

Date : ............................... ......................................... Signature of the applicant

At the very first sight, although a Curriculum Vitae profile and a job application look similar, yet it is clear to you from this picture that a job application is different from a Curriculum Vitae form.

145For free distribution

²Basic factors to be considered when filling in an application.

To follow the given instructions correctly

To give correct information to what is asked for

To fill in all the information in the application

Instead of leaving blank space, to write "inapplicable" in such blanks

Use only the blank space or the square given

To use clear hand writing or computing

Forward the application without waiting for the closing date

Before filling the application, get a photo-copy and fill that first

Factors to be considered, when filling in an application

It is important to have a copy of the last application sent

It is important to keep a copy of the application from, a copy of the advertisement for the job and the receipt you get for registering the application, if you need to make an enquiry later on.

When applying for a job, the Curriculum Vitae form has to be attached to the application. It is important to attach a covering letter with the application.

6.7 Writing a letter for a job vacancy

Sometimes, when applying for a job, instead of sending a Curriculum Vitae profile, or an application, it can be done by a letter too.

Remember the factors that should be mentioned in the application or the Curriculum Vitae. A summary of those factors should be stated in writing a letter.

According to your letter, the employer will make a pre-evaluation of you. The letter should be well written and forwarded to attract the receiver.

146For free distribution

M.P. SamarapalaNo. 36, Uda ParaJa Ela28.08.2017

The Chairman,Ja Ela Pradeshiya Saba,Kandana

Dear Sir,Recruiting for the post of Temporary Driver

This is with reference to the newspaper advertisement on 25.08.2017. According to the advertisement, I wish to apply for the post of temporary driver. I, who completed my education up to G.C.E. (O/L) have a heavy vehicle licence too. I have worked as a driver for more than 3 years in Udayasiri Company. Further, I would like to mention that I have physical qualifications as mentioned in the advertisement as required. Certificates related to the qualifications and experience are attached herewith. Accordingly, I kindly request you to recruite me to the above post and I wish to inform that I will work to my level best if I am enlisted.Thanking you,

Yours sincerely,

………………………….M.P. Samarapala

Mentioned below are some factors to consider when writing a letter for jobs. What you studied in your Sinhala lesson in writing an official letter will be useful for you.

147For free distribution

Importance of preparing a draft for the letter of application - Ability to give logical sequence of content e.g. : First, include the facts to be stated first, and later ones the later. - Ability to include all the information required e.g. : Educational qualifications, experience, preferences and hobbies. - Ability to present important factors in an order - Ability to write the letter accurately

Logical sequence of the content in a letter e.g. : The letter is from whom, name, address and date The letter is for whom; Name, Designation Address of the receiver Title of the letter Basic factors to be included in the letter ²Date of the newspaper or gazette in which the vacancy is advertised - Information required from the advertisement. - Answering all the points relevant as mentioned in the advertisement e.g. : professional skills/ achievements - Attractive presentation of information

To forward the application attractively; - the highest qualification you possess - Achievements at national and international level, are very important to be stated.

Importance of responding to the vacancy before the closing date The advertisement itself mentions the closing date for applying for a job. It is important to send the application before the deadline due to the following reasons: ² To avoid the delay in the post ² To facilitate the employer to take future steps regarding the vacancy ² Ability for the employer to understand the interest of the applicant for the vacancy

148For free distribution

It is very important to forward your letter to be received before the closing date. By that you can show your interest and it makes your letter more attractive than the others.

An advertisement was published in a weekend newspaper regarding vacancies of masons in a work site of State Engineering Cooperation. Prepare a letter to apply for the above post. Act a role play a mock interview for that.

Activity 6.6

6.8 Developing of interview skills

After applying for a job, the next-step is to face an interview, when called for.

An interview is a verbal test, conducted by the employer to examine your suitability for enrolment to the expected job/occupation.

²Ways of conducting interviews

There are 3 types of interviews conducted to select for jobs.

I. Individual interview

Head of the institution himself questions the candidate verbally. Interviews of this nature are conducted, specially in the private sector to enroll workers for business enterprises, garment factories owned by a single person.

149For free distribution

II. Group interview

These interviews are held to enroll workers for government and large scale private sector institutions. Generally there can be two or more persons in the interview board. When selecting for high level occupations, there can be about five people seen in the interview board.

III. Practical interview

Sometimes for jobs that need to test practical skills, practical tests are conducted in addition to verbal interviews. Specially in the case of computers, jobs in the technical field and music and dancing, practical tests are conducted. At present at the recruitment of teachers also, practical tests are conducted.

150For free distribution

²Importance of developing interview skills

It is essential to face interviews with a prior preparation. It is great to be successful at the interview, when a number of persons participate in the interview, for the same job, with equal qualifications as yours. If you can face successfully, you will be able to get a job and if you fail, you will live without a job for a long time.

To face an interview successfully, Charlie Marshalls 2016 has indicated some procedures to follow:

²Wear a formal dress properly. It is not suitable to go in a simple dress. Your dress should show your personality and an attractive look. ²Take an additional bio-data sheet, a note book, a pen and other necessary things ²Do a rehearsal ²Get a good knowledge of the institution that you go for the interview ²Work to scheduled time. Go to the relevant place of interview early. ²Do not argue or be critical with the interviewer or the board. ²Answer the questions frankly, honestly and not in a debatable manner. ²During the time of interview, show your politeness and learnedness. ²Never boast of yourself over the limit. Try to be you yourself. ²If you had been employed earlier, never express condemnation statements. ²During the time of interview, maintain your body language and speech positively.

When facing an interview, it is natural for any person to be stressful or be excited. A proper training will minimize stress and enable to face the interview successfully.

Group the students in the class into two groups and hold a mock interview as a role play.

Activity 6.7

151For free distribution

6.9 Importance of facing an interview well

The perception formed about you at the interview will stand important a long way. How qualified you are, your selection or rejection will be decided on the way you face the interview.

The following are some instructions given by the teacher in charge of Civic Education to a group of students, how to face an interview successfully.

Nimal:-Sir, our brother is scared because he has an interview tomorrow.Teacher:-Needn't to be scared when you learn how to face an interview, it will be ok. Nimal:-How is it sir? Please tell us.

Teacher:-The first thing is our personal appearance Nimal:-What's the personal appearance sir?

Teacher:-When we appear for an interview, our dress, the way of the hair cut, our make-up etc.Rajini:-It is not good to do too much of make-up. Isn't it, sir?

Teacher:-Quite right Rajini. You must be simple and charming. Then only the interviewers will be pleasedAbdul: -What are the other important things sir?Teacher:-Wait. I'll tell you. Look at this poster.

Factors that should be considered when appearing for an interview - Personal appearance ² Do your hair in a suitable way ² Make up ² Dress - Body Language ² Sitting posture ² Eye contact ² Facial expressions ² Use of hands

152For free distribution

- Attention and interest ² Maintaining a good rapport with the interview board ² Require a training to win the attention of the interview board in a disciplined way ² Pay attention and reply directly to questions of the interview board ² Appear before the interview board diligently and without laziness - Speech and use of language ² To speak clearly and audible enough to be heard by the interview board ² Using the language politely and courteously - Being courteous ² When entering and leaving the place where interview is held, behave politely ² Address respectfully and be disciplined when taking seat and leaving ² Answer the questions of the interview board respectfully and politely ² Behave before the interview board respectfully

An interview is a competitive stage. Sometimes 10 or 15 candidates may appear for the same job. Here, if you wish to get a better place over the others, you should face the situation in a good manner. Whatever certificates you possess, perhaps another with less educational qualifications may get the job as he or she faced the interview successfully.

"Write an essay on "if you want to pass the interview" suitable to be published in a newspaper.

Activity 6.8

6.10 Proper time management

After passing the interview, you are able to get the job. If you want to be successful in your job there are many qualities to be developed. Given below are some examples:

153For free distribution

² Determination and dedication ² cultivating dignity of labour ² working in response to the expectations of the employer to attend to employees' needs ² cultivating efficiency and productivity ² proper time management ² accurate finance management ² personal behaviour ² maintenance of balance between occupation and personal life.

Out of the above skills, the most important is the time management, because the value of time is a resource. There is an old saying, "Time is golden" to show the value of time. To make activities in the job to be successful, time should be divided according to the work. That is Time Management.

Ability to complete/finish your duty in time

Ability to win a good name in the institutionAbility to satisfy the clients

Ability to work without mental stress

No delay in work

Ability to fulfill the objectives of the institution

Ability to stop the wastage of resources

Ability to work in accordance with rules and regulations of the institution

Importance of time management

Given below are some methods for time management:

²To understand the duties assigned to you well

²To arrange them in the order of priority

²To allocate a time limit for each duty

²To follow a daily time table

²To assess the progress of the scheduled work at the end of the day

²Inquire reasons for delay and incomplete duties

²To arrange an alternative plan when taking leave

154For free distribution

A person can divide one's time into three parts as given below;

Personal time

Time for work

Time for studies

Time to be spent for personal affairs is introduced like this. It should be used apart from time of duty.

Time you have to spend to work in the office or work site is called this. In Sri Lanka, it is considered as eight hours.

Time allocated for training and completion of qualifications is called this. Sometimes leave is granted by the institutions and directed for educational activities.

As the employers always pay their attention on efficiency and productivity, Time Management is highly important.

Efficiency: using limited resources to the maximum

Productivity: achieving initially planned aims in the same way

If time is not managed properly, it is difficult to gain efficiency and productivity.

Concern of the employer on productivity and efficiency

²It is the expectation of every employer to maintain productivity and efficiency in his institution. ²Therefore, it is the right of employers to expect a service from the employees, in return for money and other facilities offered to them. ²So that the employee should consider it as his right and his duty to do the service without any reluctance. ²If these duties are well performed, institutions can reach productivity and efficiency very easily.

155For free distribution

This story is told of an unannounced visit by John F. Kennedy to the space center at Cape Canaveral in the mid 1960s. Kennady toured the complex and met a man “What do you do here?” he asked. The man replied, “I’m earning a living.” Kennady nodded and moved on. He met another man and asked the same question. “I clean away all the rabbish” the man said. Kennady smiled and strode on until he met another man and put the same question again. This time a big smile came across the face of the man who replied, “My President, I am helping to put a man on the moon.”

When you employ in an institute, you should have a wide intention to achieve the broad vision of the institute more the little work you do for it, or the wage that you obtain for it.

1. Prepare a daily time table to do your school activities.

2. Prepare an article on 'Importance of Time Management as a citizen.

Activity 6.9

6.11 Maintaining personal behaviour

In an institution there are people engaged in different levels of occupations. Therefore, it is essential to maintain your personal conduct well in the place of work. We must keep in mind that behavioural problems of a person will have adverse effects on the others too.

The chart below shows some facts to consider regarding personal behaviour:

Respecting every designation of the institution

Performing your responsibilities properly

Maintaining a sound communication

Treating employees in a friendly manner

Working with maximum dedication

Not taking leave unnecessarily

Dress in a proper manner

Characteristics of meticulous personal conduct/behaviour

156For free distribution

When the institution has faced some difficult situations, all should work collectively and protect from such adverse conditions.

It is the responsibility of every employee to maintain his own behaviour in and out of the institution, to protect its dignity.

In addition to this, there are a few behavioural patterns to be followed by the employees;

²To behave in such a way that your behaviour may not harm or bring dishonour to the others

²Adjust your behaviour in order to achieve the objectives of the institution

²Report for work on time

²Not to delay work unnecessarily

²Offer your service to the institution voluntarily at times of need

²Work to use the resources to the maximum

²Not to harm the good name of the institution

The behaviour of the employee directly influences the good name of the institution. Personal behaviour of every individual affects the activities of others and on their behaviour itself positively or negatively.

To be drunk on while on duty, chewing betel, smoking, malpractices, getting bribes, keeping away from place of work unnecessarily and engaging in corruptions will bring dishonour to the institution.

Specially to report for work on time, engage in work during working hours and leaving on time are important. To systematize attendance, most of the institutions have introduced marking the card and placing finger print instead of the signature book. One should be mindful the behaviour outside the working place too.

6.12 Proper personal financial management

²Income and expenditure It is necessary for any person to have some income to live. For that, to engage in some occupation or profession is essential. If not, he must have some other way of getting an income such as subsidies or donations.

157For free distribution

Personal Financial Management

Income Expenditure

Salary

Loans

Interest

Profits

Subsidiaries

Donations

Paying loans

Maintenance

Consumption

Investments

Education

Pay Slip

158For free distribution

Bill

For a successful living, it is essential to spend within the income. In this regard, it is needed to use money carefully.

Spending money in normal or emergency situations As there can be instances where one has to allocate money for day to day activities, as well as at emergencies, one must possess enough money.

²Opening and maintaining bank account In utilizing money, maintaining a bank account, makes day to day financial transactions easy, provides financial security and an extra income. Obtaining an interest monthly or annually from a fixed deposit in a bank can be cited as an example. Through which personal financial management too, takes place.

²Savings for future It is essential to save money for future in personal finance management due to following reasons: ²If there is a break down in earning under the expected conditions of income ²Use in unexpected problematic situations, if any emergency causes ²To be used at old age or after retirement

²To live without being burden to the others

159For free distribution

²Avoid dealing with loans for consumptions It is always advantageous dealing with loans, in your financial management. There can be unexpected troubles when dealing with loans or giving loans in day to day activities. Specially, one should not take loans for daily consumption. It is important to manage the expenditure according to one's income.

²Advantages and disadvantages of using credit cards

What do you know of credit cards? A credit card is a way of taking money on credit.

Picture of credit cards

Your family members also may have similar cards. Discuss with them how to use credit cards. There are advantages and disadvantages of using these cards:

²Better security than portability of money ²Decides on the maximum credit level for a person ²Interest free time period for payment ²Ability to get various rewards on the amount spent ²Ability to transact with any kind of currency ²Credit facilities on emergencies ²Ability to pay bills in time

²A tendency to go for unaffordable consumption due to use of credit cards ²A high rate of interest is charged ²Possibility for an outsider to misuse ²Getting additional charges for payments ²Sudden change of conditions ²Tendency to spend lavishly ²An extra charge is added for delay in payment of balance ²Becoming a long-time debtor ²Charging high annual fees

Advantages Disadvantages

160For free distribution

The main problem specially when using credit cards without a limit for services and goods is that we inescapably become long-term debtors to credit card companies.

The use of credit cards is suitable for busy people with a permanent income, for systematic payment of water and electricity bills. Those who are not frugal in spending and heavily in debts, without a permanent income, will face more problems by the use of credit cards.

²Investing or saving for future

It means that the investing or saving money for future business or for making personal life successful.Example: Investing in business, Investing in fixed depositsThe pension or the provident fund rights at old age should be managed and utilised with a good management very carefully.If you are engaged in a job where no pension or provident fund or other benefits are given, it is important to manage savings and finance in a methodical way for the future.

Similarly, it is important that we should save some money for the future from the income we derive from the occupation. When it happens to leave the job or go on retirement, the money, thus saved could be made use of. In an urgent necessity of money this saving could be used as for a loan. If employed in a job with no pension, this saving could be used for future investment.

It is important to spend the money derived from the pension or Employees' Provident Fund in a balanced way. Specially when you are without a job, your value also depreciates. In such an instance, if this money is invested properly to get an additional income, you will be able to lead a happy life of retirement. At present, banks have made arrangements on the savings of senior citizens to offer a higher rate of interest and special concessions.

Prepare an article to a newspaper on ‘Advantages and disadvantages of using credit cards’.

Activity 6.10

161For free distribution

6.13 Maintaining a balance between work and personal life

It is very important to keep balance between work and personal life, not allowing problems to arise. When work and personal life are entangled with each other, both occupation and life will be bitter. Leaving for home after finishing duties of the job in the office itself, we can have a successful personal life. To work over time to earn more than what is required, and to engage in additional activities make the personal life problematic. Spending a few hours with family together, is necessity. Household activities, educational activities of children, taking meals together, engage in pleasure trips, engage in sports, participation in religious activities and engaging in social service and family affairs will promote physical and mental health.

As well giving preference to personal life, neglecting professional work may cause displeasure among employers, employees and other workers of the institution. Therefore, it is important to have a balance in personal, social and professional life.

A person has to pay attention to five activities in daily life;

Professional Life

Personal Life

Social Life

Spiritual Life

Family Life

Activities pertaining to the job, preparation of documents, participation in meetings, engaging in training programmes

Meeting friends and relations, doing further education, maintaining personal hygiene

Children’s education, going on picnics, renovating the house, preparation of food, getting treatments for illnesses

Participation in societies of the area, helping public service, patronizing religious activities

Building up spiritual development, religious activities, moving to a religious life

Performing these activities in a balanced way, makes a life successful. Refraining from taking liquor, drugs and smoking, keeping away from bad friends, not to engage in anti-social activities and keeping away from corruptions and frauds help to keep a balance of life.

162For free distribution

Financial difficulties can be regarded as a main cause for professional and family problems. Financial problems arise due to excessive spending of income. It is essential to control unnecessary and extra expenses to manage with the income. When financial difficulties arise, attention should be drawn to get assistance from close friends. You can borrow money from parents or friends. If you are used to credit cards or to borrow on interest, the problems will aggravate and will never be able to get rid of it. Planned or systematic management raises the efficiency and productivity of the institution, whereby the employer is benefited. It paves the way for a successful personal life. Money is needed for life, but it is important to bear in mind that money is not life.

Write an essay one Systematic work enhances personal life and occupation’.

Activity 6.11

Summary

²One will be able to understand self, when a personal file is maintained from childhood.

²Before selecting a job, understanding one’s skills abilities and preferences facilitate the selection of the most suitable occupation.

²There are many job opportunities in the world of work. It is important to analyze them carefully and select the most suitable job for you.

²Filling in a bio-data from or an application for a job accurately, will make it easy to win the competitive world of work.

²An understanding of the different interviews and receiving a training to face them successfully will be of tremendous help to win the future targets in life.

²Time management and finance management is essential for a successful life.

²Maintaining the personal conduct well, will be equally important for personal life as well as for professional life.

²Maintaining a balance between personal as well as professional life immensely helps to build up personal and social development.