For Free Distribution 1

Fig.1.2 -A photograph

taken from the space

1

The Earth in which we live can be considered as a marvelous creation of nature. According to the available information, the Earth is the only planet that consists of air and water with a congenial environment for living beings.

The Earth revolves round the Sun while spinning around its own axis. The Earth’s movement around its own axis is called rotation and

the journey around the Sun is called revolution. The Earth takes 24 hours or one day to rotate around its own axis and 365 days or one year to revolve around the Sun.

The main objective of this chapter is to study about the Earth related to information about continents, oceans,

longitudes, latitudes and the shape of

the Earth.

Fig. 1.1 - Rotation of the earth

The Planet Earth We Live

The shape of the Earth

There were different ideas about the shape of the Earth in the past. At present, the Earth has definitely been identified as a spherical object. This is proved by observing the photographs taken from space. (Fi. 1.2)

Although the Earth is considered a spherical object, it is not a full sphere. The reasons are the flatness of the Earth in the Polar Regions and the

For Free Distribution 2

Fig. 1.4 – Latitudes and Longitudes

Fig. 1.3 - shape of the Earth

12757km

12714km

Equatorial diameter = 12757km

Polar diameter = 12714 km

Equatorial circumference = 40077km

Polar circumference = 39943km

The surface area of the Earth is

510 million km2.

Source - http:// www.google.lk/2015/07/10

Activities

1. i. Briefly explain what is meant by rotation and revolution.

ii. What is the time period taken for rotation and revolution of the

Earth? 2. What are the evidences which help to prove that the Earth is not a

mathematical sphere?

Latitudes and Longitudes

When observing a geographical globe, you may see a set of lines drawn from North to South and West to East. Those lines are imaginary lines drawn by us and they are called as longitudes and latitudes.

largeness of the equatorial circumference than the polar circumference. (Fig. 1.3) However, the following data proves that it is only a minor difference.

For Free Distribution 3

Fig. 1.5 – Latitudes

The lines drawn horizontally from the West to the East on the geographical globe are called latitudes and the lines drawn vertically

from the North to the South are called longitudes. (Figure 1.4)

The line drawn horizontally

on the middle of the globe is named 00 latitude or the equator.

The northern part of the equator is called the Northern Hemisphere and the southern part is called the Southern Hemisphere. The lines to the North of the equator are termed North Latitudes and the lines to its South are termed South Latitudes.

There are some main latitudes among them. Observe figure 1.5 and identify them. Latitude 900 is indicated as a point. The North Latitude 900 is the North Pole and the South Latitude 900 is named the South Pole.

Activity

1. Observe figure 1.5 and identify the main latitudes and name

them with their values.

The lines drawn on the globe connecting the North Pole and the South Pole are called longitudes.

The 00 longitude which is drawn across the Greenwich City in

England is the Greenwich Prime Meridian

For Free Distribution 4

Map 1.1 - A world map indicating latitudes and longitudes

The lines drawn to its West are called the West Longitudes and the lines to the East of it are called the East Longitudes.

From the prime meridian 3600 longitudes are distributed and 1800 run towards Eastwards and 1800 run towards Westwards. Therefore, longitude 1800 is common to both the East and West. The International Fig. 1.4 – Longitudes

Date Line follows this line. Sometimes, the International Date Line is not marked as a straight line to prevent the division of a country. Observe map1.1 and identify how latitudes and longitudes you have studied are distributed in a world map.

Latitudes and longitudes are used to indicate the location of any place on the Earth specifically and accurately.

For Free Distribution 5

Activities

1. Mark and name the following latitudes and longitudes in a blank

map of the world.

Equator (00)

Tropic of Cancer (231/20North latitude)

Tropic of Capricorn (231/20South latitude)

Greenwich line (00)

Longitude 800 East

Arctic Circle (661/20 North latitude)

Antarctic Circle (661/20 South latitude)

2. With your teacher’s instructions, mark the main latitudes on a

medium size rigifoam ball.

3. Observe the model globe and state the location of the cities of

Colombo, Tokyo, New York, London and Calcutta in relation to latitudes and longitudes.

Continent is a large land area surrounded by water.

Continents and Oceans

71% of the surface of the Earth is covered by water and 29% is covered by land. The areas covered by water consists of Oceans and Seas and the land area consists of continents and islands.

Continents

The Earth consists of seven continents.

For Free Distribution 6

Map1.2 - Continents and islands in the world

An island is a small land area surrounded by water.

There are politically divided countries in each of the continents. However, the continent of Australia is a single country. Observe map 1.3 and identify several countries located in different continents.

Continents Area million km2

1. Continent of Asia 43.6

2. Continent of Africa 30.3

3. Continent of North America 25.3

4. Continent of South America 17.8

5. Continent of Antarctica 14.0

6. Continent of Europe 10.5

7. Continent of Australia 8.9

Many islands are located around the lands in coastal areas.

For Free Distribution 7

Map 1.3 - Political divisions in the world

The water masses located among continents are called oceans and the small water bodies located close to continents and inland

areas are called seas.

There are five oceans in the world.

Ocean Area million km2

1. Pacific ocean 156

2. Indian ocean 77

3. Atlantic ocean 69

4. Antarctic ocean (Southern) 20

5. Arctic ocean 14

Japanese Sea, China Sea, North Sea, Red Sea and Mediterranean Sea are several seas located close to lands and Caspian Sea and Aral Sea are located within the continent of Asia.

Oceans

For Free Distribution 8

Activities

1. Shade the oceans in the world in blue.

2. Mark and name three seas connected to the oceans and three seas

located inside countries.

3. With the help of an Atlas name three islands located in the Indian

Ocean close to Sri Lanka.

4.

Map 1.4 - Oceans and Seas in the world

For Free Distribution 9

Assignment

1. Refer to an atlas and select any five cities and mention the latitude

or longitude close to them.

2. Name two countries which are located across the Tropic of Cancer,

Tropic of Capricorn and the Equator.

i. Name the latitudes indicated by letters A, B, C in the above

world map and write the value of them, and state the value of the longitudes indicated by letters E, F and G.

ii. Observe the map and name the latitudes located on either sides of

Sri Lanka.

iii. Name the island located close to line F in the map.

iv Name the five shaded countries in the map.

5. On a blank map of the world,

i. Shade the seven continents in different colours and name them.

ii. Mark and name two countries from continents other than Australia and Antarctica.

iii. Mark and name the following cities.

San Francisco, Rio de Janairo, Cairo, Dacca

References

²² https://www.google.lk/?gws_rd=ssl#q=area+in+the+earth

Glossary

²²Earth - mDÓúh -¦Â

²²Planet - .%yf,dalh - ÷PõÒPÒ

²²Axis - wlaIh - Aa_

²² Rotation - N%uKh - _ÇØ]

For Free Distribution 10

²²Revolution - mßN%uKh - _ØÖøP

²²Latitudes - wlaIdxY - AP»õ[S

²² Longitudes - foaYdxY - ö|mhõ[S²²Space ` - wNHjldYh - ÂsöÁÎ²²Observation - ksÍlaIKh - AÁuõÛ¨¦²²Equatorial - iul mßêh - ©zv¯÷Põmk _ØÓÍÄ circumference

²²Polar circumference - O%ej mßêh - x¸Á _ØÓÍÄ²²Diameter - úYalïNh - Âmh®²²Imaginary lines - uk(l,ams; f¾Ld - PØ£øÚU ÷PõkPÒ²²Northern hemisphere- W;=re w¾Of.da,h - Áh AøµU÷PõÍ®²²Southern hemisphere- ol=Kq w¾Of.da,h - öuß AøµU÷PõÍ®²²Equator - iulh - ©zv¯ ÷Põk²²Greenwich meridian - .s%ksÉ uOH - QÕßÂa ©zv¯

foaYdxYh ö|mhõ[S²²International Date - cd;Hka;r Èk - \ºÁ÷u\ Line f¾Ldj ÷uvU÷Põk²²Tropic of Cancer - l¾lgl ksj¾;kh - PhPU÷Põk²²Tropic of Capricorn - ulr ksj¾;kh - ©PµU÷Põk²²East longitudes - kef.kysr foaYdxY - QÇUS ö|k[÷Põk²²Arctic Circle - wdlaála jD;a;h - BUiU Ámh®²²Antarctic Circle - wekagdlaála jD;a;h - A¢uõmiU Ámh®²²Continents - uydoaùm - Psh[PÒ²²Oceans - id.r - \•zvµ[PÒ ²²Seas - uqyqÿ - PhÀPÒ²²Islands - ¥m;a - wÄPÒ