==== BLOCKS ==== 

Civic Education

GRADE 7

Educational Publications Department

For free distribution

First Print - 2015

Second Print - 2016

Third Print - 2017

Fourth Print - 2018

Fifth Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0110-4

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Printcare Universal (Pvt) Ltd. No. 77, Nungamugoda Road, Kelaniya.

For free distribution

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

For free distribution

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam Minister of Education

For free distribution

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

For free distribution

Monitoring and Supervision W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka - Commissioner General Educational Publications DepartmentDirection W. A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development)Educational Publications DepartmentCoordination Dakshina Kasturiarachchi - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department W.A.N. Darshi Ranasinghe - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentI.A.M. Afsan - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentPanel of writersC.S. Jayasinghe - Teacher center Manager ( retired )HoranaM.K. Kinsley Priyantha - Lecturer, Ruhunu National College of EducationK.A. Nilantha Pushpakumara - Teacher service, Polegoda Maha VidyalayaA.M.S.B. Alahakon - Teacher service, Dharmaraja College Kandy G.G.R.N. Somaweera - Teacher service, Girls' High School Kandy

Board of Editors Professor Premakumara de Silva - Head, Department of Sociology,University of Colombo D. M .Dhamma Dissanayake - Senior Lecturer,Department of Political Science & Public Policy, University of ColomboA. L. S. Abeywickrama - Senior LecturerNational Institute of Education, MaharagamaLanguage EditorNagalingam Prashanthan - Lecturer, Sripada National College of Education

Proof ReadingS. H. Ameenuddeen - Principal, Ar Rahmath Primary School, Galewela. IllustrationsCharles Ranathunge - Deputy Director of Education (retired), Department of Education, Western Province

- IT unit, Educational Publications DepartmentComputer Assistance

P.A.D Nisansala Sandamali R.A. Ureka Dilrukshi - IT unit, Educational Publications Department

For free distribution

For free distribution

Content

1. Our Family 1 - 45

2. Our Society 46 - 75

3. Our Culture 76 - 111

For free distribution

For free distribution

The society that we live in is a collection of a number of family units. Family is the smallest social unit in a society. A person becomes a member of a family by birth. In the same manner, a person spends his whole life as a member of the family.

In relation to various other social institutions that prevail in the society, the family consists of a few members. In addition to that, the family bonds are very strong among the members of a family. Close interpersonal relationships bind the family members with one another.Members of a family help each other all the time in order to fulfill their various needs. They act for the betterment of their family members.

1Our Family

For free distribution

Nuclear Family

Think of the members of your family. It can be a family unit formed by mother, father and children. Nuclear family is a family which consists only of the mother, father and children living in the same residence.

Figure 1.1 - A Nuclear family

For free distribution

Extended Family

The family which consists of mother, father, children and some paternal or maternal relatives living together in the same residence is known as an extended family. In our society, We can see this type of families. Perhaps, yours may also be one such family.

Figure 1.2 - An Extended family

Significance of an extended family in relation to a nuclear family

●The strength of the family is greater as there are more members in the family.

●Convenience in obtaining labour for routine household chores or economic activities.

●Children receive love, protection and affection, not only from their parents, but from the other members of the family as well.

Figure 1.3 - A child helping his grandmother

For free distribution

●Adult members of the family receive love, protection, affection and support from other members of the family.

●Younger generation from childhood becomes familiar with the better qualities like treating the adults well, respecting them, helping and supporting them.

●Convenience in transferring culture to the younger generation.

●Since responsibilities are shared among the members, family affairs could be easily and conveniently fulfilled.

●The responsibility of looking after the children is shared among the members of the family.

●Ability to build up broader relationships with the external society.

Members obtain the opportunity of enjoying the above benefits as a member of an extended family. However, in the modern society, it is a common fact that due to the effects of socio-economic factors like parents engaged in employment in distant places, the families with insufficient home space are compelled to organize themselves into nuclear families instead of extended families.

Nevertheless, even the members of nuclear families perform functions like maintaining relationships with grandparents and other relatives, working in collaboration with them and looking after them all the time. Such acts contribute towards the well-being of both the members of the family as well as the entire society.

Figure 1.4 - - Family members working together in the garden

For free distribution

Common features that can be seen in a family

When we consider the composition, performance and the existence of a family, we can observe several significant features of a family unit. Some of them are given below.

• Build up on the basis of kinship

• A nuclear family consists of a few members while the extended family consists of several members

• Members live in one home

• Members maintain close relationship

• The resources of the family are distributed among the members on a fair basis

• Influencing each other for the well-being of the family

• Acting for the benefit of all members of the family

• Maintaining closer relationship among the members on the basis of qualities like love, kindness, affection and compassion

Stability, strength and good quality of the family units become the foundation of a qualitatively stable society.

For free distribution

Benefits of being a member of a family

Getting food and nutrition

Developing qualities of cooperative living

Developing good habits and behavior patterns

Getting used to respect laws, rules and regulations

Developing leadership qualities

Getting used to respect the leadership

Developing the skills essential to lead a good life

Getting used to respect the views of others

Getting used to respect traditions, customs and rituals

Getting the opportunity of using the leisure time meaningfully

Getting the opportunity of developing relationships with the society

Obtaining good precepts

Getting traditional knowledge

Getting education

Love and affection

Getting protection

●Do you prefer to live as a member of a nuclear family, or as a member of an extended family? Give reasons for your answer.

●Prepare a list containing the benefits that you gain by living as a member of a family.

Activity 1.1

Let us succeed in life through correct objectives of life

Correct and distinct determinations formed with the purpose of making one’s life successful can be identified as objectives of

For free distribution

life. Acting on correct objectives of life is very much important to build up a successful life and to ensure a successful way of living. In the same manner when you set your life objectives, it is up to you as a member of a family to pay attention on your own expectations as well as the expectations of your parents. Further, if you can adjust your objectives in life with the expectations of the society that you live in, you will be able to enter the society as somebody who fits well with the society and may become an essential person to the society.

One of your objectives in life may be to pass your examinations well. In order to succeed in this objective, it is not sufficient to have it only as an aim. You should plan and implement suitable processes to achieve those objectives in life. Given below are some examples of suitable procedures that you can follow to achieve the objectives of your life.

Objective: Passing the examination well.

The procedure that should be followed:³ Regular school attendance³ Obedience to teachers³ Following instructions given by teachers³ Engaging in educational activities according to a time table³ Identifying subjects which indicate low performance levels³ Working with greater interest in those subjects³ Obtaining the help of the teachers and peers on these subjects³ Engaging in subject related exercises regularly³ Spending leisure meaningfully

For free distribution

If you follow these procedures well you will get the opportunity of passing the examination well. Maintaining this objective throughout your school life is a way of getting access to higher education. Through this, you will be able to achieve the expected objectives in your life.

Selecting suitable objectives

In some occasions in your day to day life you may focus your attention on various attractive objectives. However, it is also quite important to select the most suitable objective out of them to make your life a success.

There may be occasions in which your attention is directed towards sports, drama and theatre, music, drawing and various technological fields. In such situations, selecting the most appropriate sphere which tallies with your capability and skill and paying attention on developing such competencies may be important in fulfilling your objectives in life effectively.

There are many attractive but inappropriate things that we see in our daily life in society. You must pay greater attention to identify these inappropriate things correctly and avoid them or reject them.

Column I of the table given below mentions several objectives that can be achieved in a short term. State the procedures that you should follow to fulfill the objectives in column II.

Column IIColumn IThe procedure to be followed in order to achieve the objectivesObjectives

Joining as a prefect of the school prefect boardJoining the school bandJoining the school debate team

Activity 1.2

For free distribution

Given below are some objectives of life achievable in the long term. Arrange the procedure that should be followed in order to fulfill each objective.

▪Becoming a teacher

▪Becoming a national level player in any field of sports of your choice.

▪Achieving a national level victory in any field of aesthetic of your choice

Activity 1.3

Self esteem

Read the story given below

Little Shyama’s Donation

Shyama is a student studying in Grade 5. Mother, father, younger brother and grandmother live at her home. When Shyama comes home after school, she is eager to see until her father and mother come home after work.

One day Shyama awaited her mother and father with a new expectation. As soon as her mother came home she ran to her.

“Mother, father told me that we would go to the town after you came to buy new clothes for brother, me and grandmother," she said. "Shall I join you, mother?”

When Shyama asked so, mother did not respond her at once.

“You stay at home with brother and grandmother. We will buy clothes and come home soon," mother said.

“I have saved some of the money you had given me. I like to buy a ring for me with that. That’s why I asked you whether I could come.”

For free distribution

Shyama made that request again.

Mother felt happy about Shyama’s habit of saving.

“How much have you saved, daughter?” mother inquired Shyama. " I have one hundred and twenty rupees with me," Shyama replied.

“Well, then let's go.”

Shyama’s expectation was fulfilled.

Shyama went to town with her father and mother by bus. After getting down the bus they walked towards the shops.

There was a helpless grandfather by the road side.

“Dear Madam, please give me some money to buy something to eat,” grandfather requested from Shyama’s mother.

Soon, without any hesitation Shyama gave that grandfather the money she had saved to buy a ring.

“God bless you, little madam. May your life be prosperous! May it bring merits to you!,” grandfather blessed Shyama.

Grandfather’s utterances brought great happiness to Shyama. Shyama’s father and mother, too, became very happy about what Shyama had done. Before buying any clothes father and mother bought a ring that Shyama liked most. Shyama came home very happily.

Shyama’s contribution to the helpless grandfather’s meal, is an occasion that reflected great qualities that Shyama had. Desperateness, hunger of another person, sadness may have shaken Shyama. She fulfilled her duty with regard to it very well.

For free distribution

Better qualities, superior behavioural patterns and special capabilities that you have are always subject to recognition and appreciation by others. In the same way you also have the ability to do a self-evaluation about those qualities that you yourself possess. The pride that you develop in you about better qualities, superior behavioural patterns and your capabilities are known as self-esteem. Your superior qualities may bring self-esteem to you.

If there are weak characteristics in you, try to cast them aside. Sudden anger, failure to take correct decisions, rejecting other's ideas not listening to others, lack of patience and attempting to implement one's own ideas are some of the weaknesses that can be seen in a person.

Avoiding these characteristics will be effective in leading a good social life appraised and appreciated by others.

●Name a few characteristics of Shyama which influenced her self-esteem.

●Report great qualities revealed by biographies of heroes like Madduma Bandara and Puran Appu.

●Write a short drama which shows any unique quality referred to in this lesson and present it to the class in groups.

Activity 1.4

Your Identity

No individual in this world is similar to another in any manner. When we compare the external appearance, lines of the palm or finger prints it is quite clear that they are unique and different from person to person. Given below are imprints of palm and forefinger of three persons. Compare them.

For free distribution

Palm Prints

123

Figure 1.5 - Palm Prints

Thumb Impressions

123Figure 1.6 - Thumb Impressions

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) structure also differs from person to person. DNA structure tests are used at present to identify a person distinctly. You may have learnt from newspapers and other media about the cases in which DNA structure tests are used to identify persons connected with various crimes. This shows how person's identity differs biologically.

For free distribution

Not only your traits and behavioural patterns which grow from your birth, but your unique talents, too, are examples of your identity. For the protection of your identity and dignity you should also develop better behavioural characteristics, behavioural patterns and your habits of life.

For this you should be conscious to accept good things, and reject unfavourable things in a suitable manner. It is quite important to choose things which are proper and suitable to establish your identity and dignity.

Given below are some examples of good qualities that you should develop as a member of your family.

● Accept good things and reject bad things

●Identify one’s weaknesses and take steps to correct them

●Friendliness

●Honesty

●Self-discipline

●Dedication for the progress of the family

●Tolerate others' ideas

●Respect leadership

●Perform duties while enjoying rights

(1) (a) If you have any weak qualities identify them by conducting a self-evaluation and write them.

(b) Mention the actions you would take to avoid those qualities.

(2) (a) Prepare a list of names of exemplary persons you admire.

(b) Select two of those characters and list their good qualities.

Activity 1.5

For free distribution

A great service fulfilled by the school is to bestow a good citizen to the country by providing you with education, shaping up your skills, and inculcating spirituality. Your teachers and other people who serve the school work with commitment to fulfill this task for you.Therefore, the school is always important for your life.

Figure 1.9 - Students learning under the guidance of a teacher Figure 1.8 - Students practising under the guidance of a teacher

Ancient scholars have said that following and respecting noble words of teachers lead to success.

For free distribution

Religious Institutions

You may be a follower of Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, Catholicism or any other religion. Whatever religion we follow we may perform various religious activities at religious places. The main objective of these programmes is to provide religious knowledge, to guide us in the correct path and to establish good morals.

The service rendered by religious institutions is of great importance for the success of our lives.

Therefore, building up close relationships with these religious institutions, participating in programmes organized by the institutions will be quite beneficial for us. Obtaining and following the advice given by priests will contribute to have a life rich in goodness.

Figure 1.10 - A group of people engaged in religious observances in a Buddhist temple

Figure 1.12 - - A group of people attending divine service in a Christian church

Figure 1.11 - A group of people engaged in religious observances in a Hindu temple

Figure 1.13 - A group of people engaged in religious observances in a Masjid

For free distribution

 Name a few programmes conducted in a religious institution close to your home. Among them name the programmes you liked the most and explain the benefits you gained from them.

Activity 1.7

Intimate Friends

We have an inborn desire to associate friends, but selecting friends for companionship should be done very carefully. We should be familiar with friends who bear good qualities, act intelligently, who advise you of good and bad things, and who conduct themselves better. By associating such friends you can add good qualities to your life. At the same time, they will never tempt to do any incompatible thing in your social life. Associating intimate friends supports you to succeed in life.

Good Books

You may have heard of the famous saying “Reading maketh a full man”. You must practise reading good books in order to use your leisure meaningfully. Through this you can gather new knowledge to your life. You can also select role models for your life by reading biographies.

 Name two exemplary biographies you read recently. Note down the lessons you can learn from them.

Activity 1.9

 Write several good qualities that you can see in an intimate friend you closely associate.

Activity 1.8

For free distribution

Good Media Programmes

You have the opportunity of using printed media such as newspapers, magazines and electronic media such as television, radio, internet during your leisure. Media is important for you to receive information, propagate your ideas, creations and abilities through the media. When using media it is important to select effective programmes and study them or watch them.

For the success of your life, it is quite important for you to use programmes which provide you role models, that inculcate thoughts and expectations, and support you to improve your skills and potentials.

 Find out radio or television programme schedules published in daily newspapers. Select the most useful programmes for you as a student from the above schedules.Whenever you are at leisure use it to watch or listen to these programmes.

Activity 1.10

Given below are some other institutions which are beneficial to the society.

▪The library

▪Community Development Society

▪Institutions dealing with prevention of drug addiction

▪Temperance Movement

▪Organizations against cruelty to animals

▪Environmental conservation institutions

For free distribution

The meaning of the above poem in simple language is given below.

Even great personalities having good qualities and intelligence become barren when they associate cruel bad persons. Though a path is not hard with thorns and stones when it is accompanied with darkness, it becomes dreadful.

Let us spend the leisure effectively

Being accustomed to using your leisure effectively will be beneficial to you. Your engaging in sports, aesthetic activities and creative work during your leisure improves your capabilities and talents. These activities may also enhance your physical and mental stamina.

Qualities that a person improves by engaging in sports

■Bear victory and defeat happily

■Law abiding

■Appreciate fairness

■Follow commands

■Work in team spirit

■Courage/enthusiasm/ perseverance

■Enjoyment and happiness

Figure 1.15 - Students engaged in dancing practices

Figure 1.14 - Students playing a game

For free distribution

You can engage in aesthetic activities during your leisure. A few aesthetic activities you can easily engage in are given below.

●Drawing

●Reciting poems / composing poems

●Singing songs / composing songs

●Writing dramas / plays

●Playing musical instruments

●Landscaping

Benefits that you can gain by engaging in aesthetic activities

●Enhancement of creativity

●Fun

●Enjoyment

●Control of feelings and emotions

●Development of the ability to express feelings and emotions with restraint

●Development of the ability to appreciate different moments of life aesthetically

You can also engage in designing while improving other abilities you have. Diverse occasions and experiences of life, and the splendour of nature can be expressed through various creations. Various occasions in life can be enjoyed aesthetically through poetry, songs, drama, short stories and drawing.

You can also get the opportunity of engaging in sports and aesthetic activities with members of the family during leisure.

Figure 1.16 - A student engaged in an aesthetic activity during leisure

Figure 1.17 - Children playing indoor games with elders

For free distribution

Reciting poems, singing songs, engaging in sports, watching dramas and going on picnics are some other examples. Even you can make room to engage in old folk games or indoor games with your elders and parents. Through this you get the opportunity of being aware of ancient sports and games.

Figure 1.18 - Children in a picnic with parents

 Learn about your ancient folk games and sports from your teachers and elders. Collect information on one such folk game. Collect some folk poems and recite them to the tune.

Activity 1.11

Let us overcome challenges

In order to develop and maintain a successful life, it is important to work towards effective objectives. When striving to achieve them, we are compelled to face various obstacles and restraints. These can simply be referred to as challenges. Any person may face challenges in his/her daily life. Living means facing challenges. We employ various strategies to overcome these challenges. Favourable results of the most effective strategies used to overcome these challenges, always direct a person towards success.

For free distribution

As a member of a family you may also be subject to various challenges. Given below are examples of a few challenges faced by a family of the present day.

• Children are deprived of the parents' love and protection due to the parents being employed in foreign countries or both being employed.

• Lack of leisure

• Differences in attitudes, thoughts and expectations among members of the family

• Differences in emotional states among the members of the family

• Busy lifestyle

• Insufficient income for living

Sometimes the challenges faced by a family may be more complex than the above mentioned ones. However, there are various means to follow to overcome any challenge. The way to success is to follow the most appropriate strategy for the occasion to overcome the challenges.

As a student, you may also face various challenges. Your determination should be to complete your education successfully while overcoming the challenges that you face. The crucial factor that determines your position in society is your education. Therefore, you should take an interest to obtain proper future educational results.

You may have learnt from the media about courageous personalities who rendered great service to society. Though they were born in remote areas in the country, grew up with innumerable economic difficulties and sometimes went to school on foot, they completed their higher education successfully and held key positions in the public and private sector rendering a huge service to the country.

For free distribution

You may have information about internationally recognized sportsmen and women who brought fame to the country. They developed their sports skills and talents by overcoming various challenges. In this manner, there are many outstanding personalities in many fields of the country who became successful by overcoming challenges they faced. Taking them as your role models ,work with determination to overcome challenges in order to make your life successful.

 Read several biographies of “Persons who overcame difficulties and become victorious’’.

 Note down the lessons you learnt from these stories.

Activity 1.12

Let us manage our emotions well

On different occasions in our life we undergo various experience.Such experiences generate various thoughts in the human mind. These thoughts can simply be called emotions. The ability to manage such emotions effectively and controlling them, is quite essential for a person to lead a good social life.

Depending on various situations that people face in their daily life, various types of emotional conditions arise. Happiness, sadness, compassion, sympathy, fear, anger are examples of some such emotional states.

Figure 1.19 - Happy

Figure 1.20 - Sad

For free distribution

Figure 1.21 - FrightenedFigure 1.22 - Angry

When the mind is subject to various emotional states, they can be identified by facial expressions. Try to identify the emotional states shown by each figure given above by examining them carefully.

Think of an occasion you were very sad. In such a situation, physical reactions such as sighing, weeping and face turning pale, occur involuntarily.

Think of an occasion you became very happy. In such a situation you will express behaviour such as; laughing, dancing, jumping up, etc.

Figure 1.23 - A team of sportsmen after their victory

Trembling hands, face turning red are the common features of a person when he suddenly becomes very angry. Inability to control and manage unfavourable emotions, harmfully affects a person’s mental and physical health. On some occasions if a person cannot fulfill his intentions and expectations in the same way as he wishes, emotions like

For free distribution

sadness and sorrow may be generated in the mind. Failure or inability to gain higher examination results should not create an emotional state of losing hope about life. Sitting for the examination again or determining to engage in educational activities with much interest will help to fulfill the intentions.

Giving way to unwholesome emotions such as, sudden anger and motive to take revenge, harmfully affects the person himself as well as the well-being of society. You may have witnessed such incidents through media.

Therefore, management and control of emotions in a favourable manner should become a habit in life.

Passing an examination, winning a competition and birth day are several occasions that make you happy and you express your happiness. On such occasions express your happiness meaningfully so that it makes another person happy.

Instead of celebrating your birthday by having a party share your happiness giving alms to a group of desperate elders or donating school instruments to a group of poverty stricken children.

Given below are some activities that can be followed to control unfavourable emotions.

●Engage in religious activities

●Walk

●Recite poems and singing

●Aesthetic activities like drawing

●Read books

●Admire the beauty of the surroundings

●Listen to the radio

For free distribution

●Watch meaningful television programmes

●Read newspapers

●Engage in sports activities

To engage in these activities with a peaceful mind, will be quite favourable in managing emotions.

 Mention some activities which you can follow to control emotions, other than the activities given in the lesson.

 Prepare a list of effects caused in certain situations, as a result of involuntary unfavourable emotions.

Activity 1.13

Factors that an intelligent consumer should consider

Daily needs like food, beverages and medicine are fulfilled by purchasing them from the market. We have to spend a substantial amount of our income to satisfy our daily needs. We must pay special attention to several factors to purchase high quality goods utilizing the limited amount of money we have to its maximum.

As a consumer it is very important to be cautious about market conditions. The consumers are made aware of prices of essential consumer products like rice, vegetables, etc through media such as radio and newspapers. If the consumer is well aware of the prices of goods that he is going to buy he can compare the prices and the qualities and buy the goods of high quality at lower prices.

When there is a scarcity of certain goods their prices may increase in the market. In such situations the consumer can turn to substitutes of similar quality.

For free distribution

We should also be aware of the price control policies implemented by the government. Then we can buy goods that we need at controlled prices.

It is compulsory for the traders to display a consumer price list in their shops. It is useful for the consumers to be aware of the prices of goods they are going to buy

PriceVegetables

Rs 40 /=Pumpkin 1 Kg

Rs 150 /=Brinjal 1 Kg

Rs 130 /=Carrot 1 Kg

Rs 80 /=Radish 1 Kg

Rs 110 /=Ridged gourd 1 Kg

Rs 100 /=Tomato 1 Kg

Rs '50 /=Lime 1 Kg

Rs 100 /=Beans 1 Kg

Rs 110 /=Snake gourd 1 Kg

Figure 1.24 - A price list displayed in a shop

Following information must be printed on the products that are in packages

 Date of Manufacture

 Expiry Date

 Maximum Retail Price

 Net Weight

 Ingredients Figure 1.25 - Label of a product

For free distribution

As a consumer it is quite important to examine the above information to purchase quality goods.

When purchasing vegetables and fruits, a consumer should pay attention to several factors.

Freshness is a fundamental factor that indicates the quality of vegetables and fruits. When purchasing food items like fish, it is very important for us to know how the freshness can be identified in them.

Specially, when we purchase fruits we should be cautious whether they are suitable for consumption. It is often revealed that certain chemicals are used to ripen and preserve fruits. Consumption of food items which contain chemicals is highly harmful to physical health. Since they cause various illnesses, consumers should be conscious to refrain from consuming them.

 Collect newspaper reports on incidents of wrong practices of preserving food.

 Discuss with your teacher about purchasing and using medicine. Make a note of the facts elicited in the discussion.

Activity 1.14

The importance of the world of work and how the income of the family affects the living conditions

All the citizens that live in society make use of various goods and services in order to fulfill their daily needs. A large number of people are engaged in various occupations related to production, distribution and trading of goods and services that we utilize to satisfy needs and wants. Many essential things which satisfy our food

Figure 1.26 - Farmers working in the paddyfield

For free distribution

requirements are supplied by such fields like agriculture and fisheries industry. Think of the employments related to the sphere of agriculture.

In the same way, education, health, transport, electricity, security services, etc are also useful to fulfill our needs. A large number of people are employed in occupations related to such services. In addition to this many people are also employed in various industries and constructions.

There are also a large number of people engaged in self employments contributing their labour to fulfill the needs of society. A large number of self employments exist in sectors like animal husbandry and trade. Accordingly all the occupations related to all the functions performed for the benefit of citizens can be identified as the world of work.

In the world of work, whichever sector or whatever work people are employed in, they contribute their labour to serve the society. We should appreciate the contribution of their labour.

Based on the service conditions there are workers paid on a daily, weekly or monthly basis. In certain situations the payment for the service is given once they complete the assigned work.

Either your father, mother or sometimes both of them may be engaged in occupations associated with the world of work. A large

Figure 1.29 - Parents with their child purchasing goods

Figure 1.28 - A doctor and nurses treating a patient

Figure 1.27 - People engaged in fisheries industry

For free distribution

portion of their earnings is spent on purchasing goods and services essential to fulfill the needs of family members. It is quite essential to engage in a legitimate occupation to earn a sufficient income for the survival and progress of the family.

Benefits of earning a sufficient income through employment

●Ability to fulfill daily needs of the family

●Get the opportunity to consume a sufficient amount of goods and services for the members of the family to fulfill their needs

●Ability to maintain a good living condition

●Ability to save a part of the income for the use in case of an emergency

If the occupation of the parents is lost due to some reason it will affect all the members of the family unfavourably.

As the family does not get a sufficient income the family faces the problem of fulfillment of basic needs like food, clothing, shelter, education and health. Lack of sufficient income basically leads to the downfall of the living conditions of the family.

When parents are engaged in occupations sometimes they have to leave home for distant places for their employment. It is also common now for some parents to leave the motherland for employment abroad. Due to these factors modern family units are subject to various challenges. Some of these situations are given below.

●Members of the family lose the protection of their parents

●Children are denied of the proper enjoyment of love and affection of their parents

●Seeking support from external people for the protection of the family members

As a member of the family you should be able to understand these challenges properly. You should also develop strength and ability

For free distribution

to face these challenges successfully. Ensuring the protection of family members and following the advice given by parents, elders and teachers are some effective strategies that can be followed to overcome these challenges successfully.

When seeking the support of external people to fulfill the needs of the family, it is also quite essential to be cautious about the security of the family members. Overcoming these challenges successfully will result in the progress of the members of the family.

 Prepare a list of occupations related to the following sectors.

- Occupations related to paddy cultivation

- Occupations related to fisheries industry

- Occupations related to the education services

 Prepare an article stating the benefits gained by the members of a family when the parents are employed.

Activity 1.15

Let us fulfill our obligations while enjoying our rights

Entitlements that you own from your family to lead a good life may simply be called rights. Think of the rights that you get from the family to lead a good life. Examples for some of those rights are given.

 Providing food and nutrition

 Providing health facilities

 Clothing

 Shelter

 Love, affection and compassion of the parents

 Protection and security of the parents and adults

 Providing education

For free distribution

The enjoyment of these rights will help you to become a person with good mental and physical health. Parents also act with commitment to give you a good education and it will set up the background for you to lead a good social life in future.

Be keen enough to make your life better while properly enjoying the rights you own from your family.

In relation to the rights that we enjoy, there are a set of obligations and responsibilities that we should perform. Each and every right that we enjoy in turn, binds us with certain obligations and responsibilities attached to them. Fulfillment of these obligations and responsibilities further may lead to establish the rights that you enjoy. In the same way the fulfillment of your obligations towards your parents helps in turn to safeguard their rights.

Figure 1.32 - A child studying in a study room

Figure 1.33 - A family

Receiving the love of your parents and living in a happy family environment are rights that you have. Your obligation in turn is to love, be compassionate, be obedient to and respect them. When you

Figure 1.31 - Children worshipping their parents

For free distribution

fulfill your obligations towards your parents and adults their love and attachment towards you will increase. Safeguarding the customs and traditions maintained by your family and your contribution to maintain them further is also an obligation you have towards your family.

Education is a right that you have. Your duty and obligation are to engage in educational activities with enthusiasm, be obedient to teachers and follow the instructions and advice given by them. It is also a duty of you to get education well and serve the society as a good citizen.

Protection of the things in the family, taking the leadership of the family when the parents are away from home, looking after the younger brothers and sisters are the responsibilities of the children.

●Earning a living by engaging in a legally recognized occupation

●Leading an exemplary life

●Providing protection and security to the family members

●Fulfillment of food and nutritional needs

●Taking the leadership of the family

●Taking correct decisions with regard to affairs of the family

are some examples of the obligations and responsibilities of parents.

Proper fulfillment of the obligations and responsibilities is very important. It develops interpersonal relationships among them and confirms the persistence of the family.

You are now aware that society is formed of a collection of numerous family units. In order to generate a wholesome society, it is essential that members also become completely wholesome. There are

For free distribution

a large number of qualities that you should develop when you work as a member of a family. Development of these qualities in you, provides a good citizen to the society and supports you to lead a good social life. Always try to develop the qualities that are necessary for you to lead an exemplary life. Therefore accept and follow the advice and guidance given by the parents and adults properly.

 What are the duties you carry out daily on behalf of your parents and elders?

 Collect several songs and poems which praise the qualities of mother and father. Practise singing them to the tune.

Activity 1.16

For free distribution

Let us build up favourable relationships with the members of the family and the neighbours

You may be a member of either a nuclear or an extended family. However, there are obligations and responsibilities attached to the relationships maintained with the maternal or paternal relatives. From your childhood you should develop the habit of identifying their relationships, and use of appropriate words to address them in order to maintain family relationships. Identifying the relatives and paying due respect to them, treating them well, and fulfilling your obligations towards them will be effective in developing ecstacy and respect towards you among your relatives.

Your relationship to them

Maternal

Relatives

Your relationship to them

Paternal

Relatives

Your mother’s..Your father’s…Grand father Seeya (Paattan)FatherGrand father Seeya (Paattan)Father

Grand mother Aachchi (Paatti)MotherGrand mother Aachchi (Paatti)Mother

Uncle MaamaElder BrotherUncle Mahappa(Periyappa)Elder Brother

Uncle MaamaYounger Brother

Uncle Baappa(Sittrappa)Younger Brother

For free distribution

Your relationship to them

Maternal

Relatives

Your relationship to them

Paternal

Relatives

Your mother’s..Your father’s…

Aunt Nanda (Maami)Elder Brother’s wife

Aunt Loku Ammaa (Periyamma)

Elder Brother’s wife

Aunt Nanda (Maami)Younger Brother’s wife

Aunt Punchi Ammaa (Sinnamma)

Younger Brother’s wife

Cousin Brother Massina (Machchan)Brother’s sonCousin brother(Chagotharan)Brother’s son

Cousin Sister Naena (Mathini/ machchal)

Brother’s DaughterCousin sister (Chagothari)Brother’s Daughter

Aunt / Loku amma Punchi amma (Periyamma/Periyannai, Siriya thaai/siriyannai)

Elder /sister/Younger SisterAunt Nendaa (Maami)Elder /sister/ Younger Sister

Loku thaaththa baappa (Periya Thanthai/ Siriya Thanthai)

Sister’s husbandUncle Maamaa Sister’s husband

Cousin Brother chagotharanSister’s SonCousin Brother Massina (Machchan)Sister’s Son

Cousin Sister

(Uravu muraich chagothari)

Sister’s Daughter

Cousin Sister Nenaa (Mathini/ machchal)Sister’s Daughter

For free distribution

Words used to address relatives differ from region to region. Some terms which are regionally used, are given below.

Numerous benefits can be gained by maintaining relationships with the relatives. Younger generation gets the opportunity of receiving knowledge about customs, traditions and cultural practices from the elder relatives. These relationships immensely contribute to pass down the skill of practising these customs and traditions from generation to generation. Working in harmony with relatives contributes to the growth of qualities related to collaboration in the younger generation. As a result of mutual help and support; relatives will tempt to help you in emergencies.

Association with relatives is immensely beneficial to pass down these practices to the younger generation. Relatives participate in various functions of the family. Religious activities held at home, weddings, housewarming ceremonies are examples of some such functions.

These opportunities of meeting relatives generate happiness and pleasure among members of the family.

For free distribution

Customs, and traditions practised in the family

Customs

There are customs and traditions connected with various matters of the family. They are followed in different occasions in the life of the family members. Customs guide us on those that we should do and avoid. Knowledge about the customs followed at the following occasions are important. They are:

●Laying the foundation stone for a new house

●Housewarming ceremony

●Introduction to the letters of the alphabet (Akuru Kiyaweema) ceremony

●Weaning ceremony (Idul Kata gaema)

●Wedding ceremonies

●Customs followed at funerals

Sri Lanka is a multi-cultural country. It consists of various communities, followers of various religions, users of different languages. Therefore, they follow different customs and traditions and sometimes there are also regional differences in these practices.

Traditions prevailing in the family

Customs and rituals that prevailed in society for a long time can be considered as traditions. Sometimes there may be traditions confined to your family alone.

For free distribution

Instances of such traditions maintained by the family are given below:

●Daily religious observances

●Worshiping parents and elders before leaving home

●Taking meals together with other family members

●Visiting relatives before the dawning of the New Year (in some regions this is practised after the dawn of New Year)

●Going to religious places together with the members of the family on days of religious importance.

You should be well aware of the traditions followed by members of the family. You should vehemently follow and practise these traditions. Upholding the traditions followed by adults further contributes to the well being of the family as well as the society.

Relationships maintained between the family and the neighbours

It is quite difficult for a person or a family to fulfill one’s needs and requirements alone. On various occasions, we have to seek the help and support of our neighbours. In the same way there are many occasions in which our neighbours, too, seek our help and support. From time immemorial, it has been a specific feature of the few oriental culture to build up cordial relationships with neighbours. Think of occasions on which your neighbours come to help your family. The help you got from your neighbours at various activities of the family, emergency situations, and at ceremonial functions may have become very important for your family. Working cordially with neighbours is also important for all of us as members of society.

For free distribution

Following are examples of some such occasions.

Working in collaboration with neighbours helps the development of the region that you live in. Unity among the people living in an area immensely contributes to carry out various community activities effectively.

If we want to develop a cordial relationship with neighbours, we should be very much concerned about carrying the routine activities of the family without disturbing their community life. Improper disposal of waste material, the use of televisions and radios at a high volume, engagement of unlawful occupations are some examples that disturb the community life. We should always take precautions to avoid the occurrence of such situations. It is also our social responsibility to build up our pattern of living in such a way that it contributes to the well being of the society.

For free distribution

 Mention in Column I the traditions followed by your family. In Column II mention the benefits gained by following these traditions.

Benefits achieved by following these traditionsTraditions followed by your family12345

 State several measures in your exercise book that can be taken to develop the cooperation and cordiality among the people living in your area.

Activity 1.16

For free distribution

Figure 2.1 - A family

2OUR SOCIETY

For free distribution

For example, people of hunting era had spent a collective life and worked in cooperation to fulfill their food requirements and their basic needs.

Figure 2.2 - A picture of hunting era

In nomadic era, those collective activities expanded further, since they had to go in search of grasslands for animal rearing and exchange animal products.

Figure 2.3 - Women harvesting paddy

With the development of agricultural activities, the need for preparing lands, cultivating, harvesting, exchanging goods, and other services became complex. There they worked more with social groups and institutions. Therefore it could be noticed that development took place as an agrarian peasant society. Society became more complex with the enhancement of industrial knowledge and the skills of making and using goods. It was expanded further on the basis of producing goods, extracting resources, trade and consumption. With the modern technological era, this situation has become more complex.

For free distribution

Figure 2.4 - Industrial knowledge of manFigure 2.5 - Urbanization

Figure 2.6 - Super/ ultra-technological era of man

Thus, when we consider the eras of early human civilization, it is obvious that the human society has had its beginning in a simple level and developed into a complex nature. During these eras, the family which is the smallest unit of the society has been subject to several changes. Owing to those changes in families, the whole society has also changed relatively.

 Define the term 'society'.

 Prepare a collection of information on how society evolved from a simple to a complex one.

Activities 2.1

For free distribution

Inter-relationships in the society

A human society exists or becomes successful, only if it has good inter-relationships. This inter-relationship should be there between mother and father, while the same kind of relationship should be maintained among children and relatives too.Whenever the relationship within the family is strong, inter-family relationships will also be strengthened. Thus when a strong relationship is built among the families, the whole society becomes inter connected with strong bonds

Accordingly, the inter relationships in a human society can be indicated as follows:

Brothers

and Sisters

Mother

Relatives

Father

Inter-relationships between parents and children

Family is the main source which produces the people needed for the existence of the society. The modern civilized society has identified a mechanism for the upbringing of children after a legal marriage. There, the parents maintain relationships with their children by fulfilling their obligations such as feeding, safeguarding, providing education, helping to satisfy other needs, protecting from diseases and settling them in marriage. It is the responsibility of children to be accountable of such parents and utilize all those privileges fruitfully. Children are also supposed to fulfill some duties towards their parents.

For free distribution

Looking after the parents when they are old, feeding them, showing affection and being obedient to them are some of the duties to be performed in order to maintain a good relationships between the two parties.

Today, the commitment of some towards this is insufficient. Since it is not good for the well being of society, parents and children should maintain good inter relationships as citizens.

Figure 2.7 - Helping the parentsFigure 2.8 - Worshipping parents

 Think of the nature of relationship that exists between you and your parents or guardians.

 Suggest the steps to be followed to enhance inter-relationships between parents and children.

Activities 2.2

Inter – relationship between teachers and students

Being brought up in the family, the children’s next step is to join school. Teachers facilitate them as parents, when they are in the school. It is the duty of the teachers to build the future of the child by making him / her obedient, while identifying talents, skills and potentials.

For free distribution

They also contribute to build up a balanced personality by giving them all sorts of knowledge and wisdom and making them realize good and bad, right and wrong. Therefore it is essential to maintain teacher – student relations correctly, in order to ensure the existence of human society.

Figure 2.9 - Students learning under the guidance of a teacher

Inter-relationship with neighbours

Neighbours maintain close relationships with a family. We should maintain some good human qualities such as being peaceful, brotherhood, cooperation, helping others, giving refuge and sharing things. Thus, if we maintain cordial relationships with neighbours we can keep friendly human ties. Only those who have such qualities can ensure a society with co-existence. The society becomes restless and chaotic due to poor relationships with the neighbours.

Figure 2.10 - Shramadhana

For free distribution

Maintaining inter-relationship with social institutions

There are different types of social institutions formed to fulfill various needs of people. Religious, government, private and all other institutions have been formed to ensure the well-being of people. Therefore, it is important to build up cordial and friendly human relationships with these institutions by actively participating in their activities. The nature of inter-relationship you maintain with these institutions may decide your relationship with them. Since all these institutions are directed towards you, it is important to maintain good relationships with them.

Women'sclubs

UnionsFuneral aidsocieties

Society

Sports clubs

Villagedevelopmentsocieties

Religiousinstitutions

Youthclubs

For free distribution

 Prepare a list of benefits you can obtain by maintaining a good inter-relationship with teachers.

 Discuss the benefits we can obtain by maintaining good inter relationships with neighbours, for social welfare.

 Prepare a list of institutions your family maintains relationships with.

 Select the institutions with which they maintain relationships to the minimum and suggest the ways to improve them.

Activities 2.3

Different types of relationships that existin a human society

Religious institutionsVillage developmentassociationsSports clubs

Contribute toHelpContribute to

Learning religionVillage developmentDiscipline andrestraints

Spiritual developmentProviding commonservices

Developing sports

Internalizing moralsWelfare activities

Training to toleratevictory and defeat

Religious observancesWorking cooperatively

Making leaders

Common affairsProviding leadershipto the village

Working cooperatively

Developing organizingskill

For free distribution

These types of organizations are there in your area. It is important for people to conduct close relationships with all these organizations. Since they have been formed for the needs of people in your area, it is the duty of all to attend and maintain good relationships with them.

 Prepare a list of different associations found in your area.

 Write a few services performed by these associations.

 Describe the way the members of your family participate in these associations.

Activities 2.4

Using data and information for the wellbeing of the society

Data means the sources which provide information related to a scope of a subject. A specific idea can be expressed correctly through this. Data is collected for a specific purpose. Modern world is full of data and information. A large number of media are available to get information in this modern world.

It is important to use data and information correctly and rationally, for self and social needs. We should work wisely when using the internet and social media without going astray or being a slave to information. Since it is easy to gather information, we must use them fruitfully for educational purposes.

 Make a list of sources in your school, to obtain the data and information easily.

 Explain with examples, how these sources can be used for educational purposes.

 Note the types of data that can be obtained from television, radio, internet and newspapers. State the benefits you derive from them.

Activities 2.5

For free distribution

Need of data and information

Tharumi and Tharindu witnessed an accident on their way back home from school. After the accident, the bus went fast without stopping. However, Tharindu noted the number of the vehicle in his mind. After that, people in the area rushed to the spot and took the student to the hospital. Tharindu gave the number of the vehicle which committed the accident to the police officer who came there for the inquiry. The police officer thanked and praised Tharindu for the support given for his duty.

 What is the most important task done by Tharindu regarding the above incident?

We have to face different incidents in our day to day life. Data and information are important to face those incidents. If we have correct information, we can do all our affairs easily, while minimizing problems.

Data and information are not only written and spoken forms, but the experiences we get in our life also belong to them. If we have prior experience, we can face incidents, problems or a challenge easily.

Accordingly it is important to use the data and information available fruitfully for man as well as for the society. It should be made a habit in life.

Media presents much information on economic and social needs of people.

For free distribution

Essential information we obtain in our day to day life

²Weather forecast

²Exchange rates

²Market prices

²Important and emergency phone numbers

E.g.- 1919 – state information Centre

119 – emergency call bureau

²Advertisements

²Classifiedes

²Government’s announcements

²Information on employments

Media presents different types of information. There can be doubts about exaggerations, falsehood, faithfulness, etc. Therefore we must be rational in using information.

In the present world, most of the media make use of popular people for marketing their goods and services. It is important to be knowledgeable enough to select the best thing without being a slave of them. Especially we must be alert about food, beverages, styles, technological devices, etc.

For free distribution

Facing different phenomena effectively

In our life, constantly we have to face different occasions and phenomena. Some of them are as follows:

²Facing examinations and failing them

²Death of our closest family members

²Financial hardships

²Disputes with friends

²Association of unsuitable friends

²Making decisions for occupations

²Selecting subjects

²Identifying talents and skills

²Being subject to social injustice

²Mental unrest

²Facing accidental disasters

How do you face any of these occasions? Do you have strength for that? If not, what should you do? Ask these questions yourself. Then your mind will give you suitable answers. Be always keen on that. Do not run away from challenges you get. Face them with courage.

Do not think that a problem has only one solution. There can be several options. For example, what should you do if you fail the examination? Here, most of the people become disappointed. However you have several options to face this challenge successfully.

For free distribution

Example -

²Getting ready for the examination again

²Following a professional course

²Developing other skills and potentials

²Being engaged in a self-employment

²Obtaining a training in a selected field

Therefore we should not build up negative attitudes to lose our lives, or to be fed up with. It is our duty to improve the psycho-social skills to face such situations successfully.

 Recall a challenging situation you faced.

 What were the problems you faced in such a situation?

 What were the weaknesses you had in facing such a situation ?

 Do you have those weaknesses even today?

 If so, suggest the measures to get rid of those weaknesses and practise them.

Activities 2.6

Working creatively in challenging situations in life

Creativity is the most unique strength of a person. Man has become a special being among all other animals, mainly due to this power. All the inventions in the world have been imaginations of the human mind. Therefore, it is important to work creatively in all challenging occasions. If you are a creative person, you should have

For free distribution

positive answers for the following questions.

 Am I so curious?

 Am I observational?

 Do I consider alternatives?

 Do I day dream on my future?

 Am I always keen?

 Can I identify bad habits?

 Do I think freely?

 Can I give new solutions for practical problems?

If you have positive answers for these questions, you are truly a creative person. Then you can face any challenge successfully.

 Focus your eyes on all objects around you.

 Write down the thoughts you get when you see those objects.

 Create images about those thoughts.

 Think innovatively about any occasion or object.

 Focus your attention on the inner side of the incidents reported in newspapers and pictures with a different angle rather than getting a superficial idea.

 Suggest a creative solution for problems in your family or in your school.

Activities 2.7

For free distribution

Rights available in society

Rights are the privileges given to a person by the human society. They are important to make life satisfied. The rights provide man an opportunity to spend a good and dignified life.

Inherited from the society itselfClosely related tocommon wellbeingof the society

Restricted

Basic featuresof rights

Free fromSelfishness

Closely related to duties

Rights entitled to a person

Civil Rights

 Right to live

 Right to education

 Right to follow any religion or a faith

 Right to expression

 Right to an employment

 Equality

 Right to live in a place of preference

Political Rights

 Right to be an elector

 Right to be a candidate

 Joining any political party

 Electing any government

 Criticizing the government

 Holding government posts

For free distribution

Duties related to rights

You are entitled to several rights as a member of a society. All those are given to you for the benefit of the society. Therefore, it is important to fulfill your duties before enjoying rights. The bond of the citizens to fulfill duties entrusted for the existence of a society is known as a duty. Therefore, you are bound to fulfill the duties you are entrusted with.

Rights

• Education

• Following any religion

• Expressing views

• Living

Duties

 Learning well

 Not harassing other religions

 Talking without hurting others

 Living without bothering others

 Prepare a list of rights you enjoy.

 Match the duties you are supposed to fulfill according to that list.

Activities 2.8

Importance of enjoying rights within a legal framework

Any society should focus special attention on fulfilling duties while enjoying the rights. When everyone enjoys rights in an excellent manner a good society emerges. Ensuring personal rights and freedom of every person, fulfilling the needs of people and developing inter-personal relations, will possibly build up good life style and emergence of a civilized society will be the final outcome of it.

For free distribution

Qualities to be improved to live as a good citizen in society

Man is a great treasure. For a man to be a great treasure, there should be perfect human qualities in him. Man should love his fellow men in the society while extending the same affection to animals and environment. It will create a good human society. Some of the great human qualities man should develop are as follows:

Fulfilling duties

Abide by thelaw

Simple life

Tolerance of others' views

Loving others

Compassion andkindness

Being honest

Respecting rights

Being disciplined

Using pleasant words

Selflessness /Altruism

Spirituality

Greatqualities

For free distribution

 Make a list of qualities you have, instead of the qualities given in the above diagram.

 Suggest some steps that you can take to uplift these qualities.

 Describe the benefits obtained by society when members of it possess good qualities.

 Make a poster or draw a picture that depicts good qualities of human society.

Activities 2.9

Rights of professionals

Article 23 of universal charter on human rights has given every individual the right to work, right to choose one’s occupation freely, right to enjoy reasonable facilities while working and to ensure job security.

Accordingly, several rules and regulations have been introduced to safeguard rights of servants in public as well as in private sectors.

 Safeguarding the rights of people through the constitution.

 Several provisions such as labour laws, employee’s provident fund, widows and orphans pension, insurance schemes, human rights commission and establishment code, have been introduced to safeguard the rights of professionals.

 Accordingly, any person who faces an injustice in the place where he or she is employed, of these rules and regulations will safeguard them.

For free distribution

Disadvantages of not practising employee’s laws correctly

 Exploitation of labour

 Dissatisfaction of employees

 Not getting a reasonable salary

 Loss of job security

 Being helpless after the retirement

 Injustice caused to workers

 Being subject to the influence of employers

 Accidents and diseases caused by insecurity

Preventing exploitation of child labour

According to Shop and Office Employees Act, made against exploitation of child labour, children below the age of 14 cannot be employed. If such children are employed, it can be prevented by informing the Commissioner of Labour.

Since education is compulsory in Sri Lanka, every child under the age of 14 should attend school. Children are employed mainly due to economic problems in families, helplessness of children, ignorance of parents, influences of some people, and traditional occupations.

Impacts of employing children as labourers

 Falling ill as physical and mental strength weaken

 Exploitation of labour

For free distribution

 Subject to abuse

 Losing opportunities for learning

 Losing the pleasant childhood

 Engaging in anti-social activities

 Addiction to intoxicated drugs

 Subject to harassments

 Getting mental / physical disorders

Social responsibility on child labour

 Treating all children as our own children

 Directing them to a school for compulsory education

 Not employing children for narrow expectations

 Making the relevant institution aware of child labour

 Adults not depending on children

 Prepare a poster depicting professional rights.

 "Employment of children, make them void of their own world". Compose poems, songs and 'viridu' (bard) on this theme.

Activities 2.10

Retirement of servants

All the employees in both public and private sectors have a legal procedure for retirement. Government servants are to retire at the age of 57 but they have the option to work until the age of 60. Private

For free distribution

sector servants can get their Employees Provident Fund at the age of 55. However the female employees can get it for their marriage.

Before retirement, the servants should make the Department of Pension, aware of their retirement through the heads of institutions they are employed in. Prior to retirement they should submit all the relevant documents and complete their files.

Spending the retirement fruitfully

Both public and private sector servants spend their time and labour on behalf of the needs of the people in the country. Once they lose the usual duty – bounded environment, in which they worked for a long period of time, they are liable to face physical and mental inconveniences.

Therefore it is important to work with a pre-plan to spend one’s retirement productively. They can engage in different types of activities such as engaging in hobbies, helping for family affairs, engaging in creative activities, and sharing their own experiences.

Financial rights for the duties performed

Every employee is legally entitled to get a salary and some of them are entitled to get over time allowances for extra work done in their extra time. Since you are given a salary for your service in an institution, it is the duty of every servant to do a service in par with the salary they obtain.

Steps taken by the society to safeguard children, youth and elderly people

Every country takes measures to enhance its qualitative development. The whole society consists of children, young people and elderly people. Several service centres and welfare activities are in operation to safeguard them.

For free distribution

Example -

For youth

For elders



For ChildrenSchoolFree EducationNutrition and protection

Trade unionsProfessional coursesEmployment institutions

Pension schemesWelfare fundsHealth care

In this way, several institutions and services have been established to safeguard these groups.

Different laws in our society and their influences to safe-guard children and elders

Every society in the world follows a system of rules and regulations to protect children and elders. As a whole the human rights are inter-related with laws. Different countries have enacted these laws following their hereditary ways. Accordingly, they have taken several steps:

• Establishing child care centers

• Providing education facilities

• Providing things totally free or at a concessionary price

• Giving scholarships

• Providing information related to employment opportunities

• Providing pensions and insurance schemes for elderly people

• Providing health insurance

• Establishing home for elders

For free distribution

In this way, most of the societies have accepted the value of safeguarding children and elderly people equally.

Challenges faced by the members of a society

When we live in a society we have to face different challenges. Challenges are obstructive situations and problems to which immediate solutions cannot be given. People encounter these challenges frequently. Following qualities and skills should be developed to face challenges successfully.

 Tolerance  Creativity

 Endurance  Forwardness

 Firm determination  Sustainability

 Self confidence  Physical and mental strength

 Bravery  Being strategic

 Rationality  Being tactical

As students, facing an examination is a challenging situation. To face such a challenge successfully, we must work systematically by finishing our studies, answering model papers and by enhancing self-confidence. It is the most successful way to face challenges in examinations.

Most of the people in the modern society face challenging situations such as :

• Competitions

• Complexity of society

• Impact of media

For free distribution

• Modern fashions

• Cultural degeneration

• Deterioration of morals

• Increasing number of abuses

• Safeguarding children from harmful forces

• Unemployment

• Incompatibility between educational and professional world

• Drawbacks in using English language

• Using new technological devices

• Increasing cost of living

• Environmental problems

Through different types of social stratum various challenges have emerged in the society.

Overcoming the challenges

There should be a specific programme or a pre-plan to win a challenge. We must face challenges instead of fleeing away from them. By facing challenges, we can get strength, experience and maturity needed for that. If you want to face challenges successfully you must face them practically instead of rejecting, postponing, replacing them and wasting time by thinking about them.

For free distribution

h

h

h

y of Wilma Rudolph

y of Wilma Rudolph

y of Wilma Rudolph

ng story

ng story

ng story

Inspirin

Inspirin

Inspirin

Story of Wilma is a fine example for the possibility of winning any challenge by working with great self confidence and dedication.

Steps to win challenges

²Building up life objectives or targets

²Adapt to an affordable life style

²Taking correct decisions

For free distribution

²Creative thinking

²Organizing activities with a plan

²Selecting different options

²Taking advice and directions of elders

²Changing all defeats into experiences of life

²Being optimistic

²Self-confidence in one’s own work

To win any challenge successfully, it is important to develop your strengths by following the above steps.

 Recall the challenges you faced.

 Recollect the occasions you won and got defeated.

 Consider separately the reasons to win the challenges and causes that influenced the defeat.

 Recall the qualities you should improve to win the challenges successfully.

 Read the biographies of those who have won challenges, and add the examples to your life.

Activity 2.11

Obligations and responsibilities to be fulfilled for the well being of society

Obligations

Obligations are those which people are bound to do as citizens for the existence of common society. These obligations can be divided into two as legal and moral.

For free distribution

Moral ObligationsLegal Obligations

 Treating parents

 Treating and respecting elders

 Being self-disciplined

 Safeguarding traditions

 Respecting other religions and ethnic groups

 Respecting national symbols and national heroes

 To be obligate the government

 Following the laws of the state

 Paying taxes

 Fulfilling duty correctly

 Maintaining law and order

We are legally bound to fulfill legal obligations. If we neglect them we are liable to be punished. Therefore for the well being of society the responsibility of all citizens should not ignore legal duties.

Moral obligations are not legally bound and they are related to the conscience of a person. Even though we do not fulfill these obligations we will not be subject to any punishment. But we will be blamed and rejected by the society. Society can either give punishments or not.

However, by failing fulfilling these moral obligations with the lapse of time one will be subject to mental conditions like sadness, being fed up, unrest and inconvenience, causing deterioration of personal life style. For example, parents look after their children by feeding, giving education, moulding their future and bestowing their own properties. If the children do not look after parents in return, it is a negligence of obligations. It will deteriorate the person.

Therefore, both legal and moral obligations are essential for the smooth existence of society.

For free distribution

 Prepare a list of moral and legal obligations you will fulfill to be fulfilled by you.

 Draw a picture depicting such occasions.

Activity 2.12

Responsibilities

The liability to fulfill obligations is known as responsibility. As members of a society we have many responsibilities to fulfill.

Example -

 Sustainable use of public property in the society for the common benefit of people.

 Respecting rules and regulations of society

 Contributing for the good governance of society.

Thus obligations and responsibilities are mutually inter-woven. This is inseparable as the bark to the tree. Smooth existence of a society is ensured on the basis of these obligations and responsibilities.

The following diagram displays how the fulfillment of obligations and responsibilities contribute for the well being of the society:

For free distribution

How fullfilling duties and responsibilities results in social welfare

Citizens respecting rules and regulations emerge

Following rules and regulations

People do not attempt to do misdeeds

Law abiding citizens emerge

One’s own rights and the rights of others aresafeguarded

By that

By that

By that

Thus

Example -

Emergence of a satisfied and dignified society

When one’s needs are fulfilled easily, it brings a sense of convenience. Since all respect each other, one feels of self-dignity. Then the society functions smoothly.

 Possibility of developing a wholesome life style

When only the good things happen in a society, people build great confidence on the society. It provides all an opportunity to spend a good life.

 Possibility of maintaining wholesome inter personal relationships.

Since obligations and responsibilities are fulfilled well inter personal relationships increase. It makes room for maintaining wholesome (good) interpersonal relationships easily.

For free distribution

 What are your responsibilities with regard to your family affairs?

 What are your responsibilities with regard to your school?

 Explain how you fulfill those responsibilities.

Activity 2.13

For free distribution

Identifying Culture

Every society has a culture which is specific to it. Aggregation of behavioural patterns, habits, customs, rituals, attitudes and beliefs of people in any society is culture.

Culture includes the way people live in a social system, too. Different people have explained the word culture in various ways. Therefore a precise definition cannot be presented.

We all have a culture. The aggregation of our behavioural patterns, different habits and addictions, customs, traditions and faiths can simply be defined as culture.

Culture includes food habits, customs related to marriages and funerals, religious observances, ways of worshipping, etc. These features differ from society to society. Consequently, one culture can be distinguished from another.

3Our Culture

For free distribution

Definitions presented on Culture

There is no common definition presented on culture. Different anthropologists as well as sociologists have defined culture in differentways. Given below is one such famous definition.

'The culture is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, custom and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society.' -E. B. Tylor- The above definition proves the fact that culture includes all human activities. It makes people to be adapted to a common system of morals or it is the instrument which predominantly controls man. Therefore man cannot be controlled in the absence of some kind of a culture. The fundamental task of culture is to provide the strength needed to control human society in a formal manner. Culture teaches us do's and don'ts and guides us how to follow them. Study the following dialogue to have a better understanding of culture.

Grade seven subject teachers and class teachers of Namal Yaya Maha Vidyalaya decided to take their students on an educational field trip. It was arranged as a two day trip covering two historical cities, Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa. Here is a part of the conversation that took place between the class teacher and a few students.

Dewni : When I left home in the morning, my mother asked me to visit all the eight sacred places in Anuradhapura and study the importance of them. She also asked me to describe them to her and father once I get back home.

Janutha : Is it so? Even though I have heard of the eight sacred places, even I do not know what they are. Let's ask our teacher.

Dewni : Teacher, will you tell us about the eight sacred places, once we reach Anuradhapura?

For free distribution

Teacher : Yes, children. I will explain you the importance of our trip as well as the historical value of the places we are visiting. That is why I asked you to bring a notebook and a pen.

Ansar : Teacher,do the eight sacred places belong to our culture?

Teacher : That's right. Very good. Hope you all listened to Ansar. Ansar has already understood the facts by reading books. All artistic creations and tanks in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa are part of our culture. They are our cultural heritages. Not only Buddhists, but also Hindus have contributed to these creations.

Devi : Teacher, I have heard that Shiva Devala in Polonnaruwa is a construction of Hindus.

Teacher : Yes, there is a belief that Shiva Dewala dipicts Hindu Culture.

Nimesh : Teacher, then is it only religions, stupas and wewa belong to culture?

Teacher : That's also a good question. Not only those, culture consists of customs and rights of people, belifs, food habits,clothing, ways of speaking and behavioural patterns of the people.

Fathima : Teacher, are they common to all ethnic and religious groups?

Teacher : No, you must understand this correctly. Every ethnic and religious group has a culture. However their cultures differ from one another. But some cultural elements are common to all of us. Do you know them?

For free distribution

Janutha : Teacher, I know.

Teacher : Well, then, tell them Janutha.

Janutha : Language, religion, arts and crafts, clothes and dresses customs and rituals.

Dewni : Teacher, though these are common to all, the way they are performed differs from group to group, in terms of their ethnicity and religion, aren't they?

Teacher : Yes, Dewni, explain your idea, so that all your friends can understand.

Dewni : See,.... clothes and dresses are common to all of us. But Sinhalese wear osariya, Tamils wear saree, Muslim women wear saree and furdha. That is why I told that though there are common features, some differences exist among them.

Teacher : Well, Dewni explained it with good examples. There can be some others who still cannot understand. I will explain further for them.

We have a culture. It varies from one ethnic group to the other. It also varies from religion to religion. Sometimes it may vary from area to area and from society to society. Therefore one's own culture is known as cultural identity.

Hope you all understand. Everyone should take action to safeguard cultural identity which is always a good thing. Now you all know what cultural elements are. You also know what cultural identity is.

Now let me ask a simple question.

Fathima : Teacher, is it a homework?

For free distribution

Teacher : No, you must answer it now itself. Let us give a clap to the one who tells the answer first. Here is the question. Give a simple definition for culture and say it aloud so that all can hear.

Nimesh : Teacher, culture means, not only the things we eat, drink, wear, speak, behave and worship, but also our arts and crafts, customs, rituals and all such other activities.

Teacher : Very good. It is a better answer than I expected. Do you understand it now? Others should also keep their definitions in mind and write them in their books later.

Elements of culture

Service rendered by culture for the existence of any society is very important. It is also subject to changes with time. Culture also changes from society to society. Therefore, there are specific features unique to each culture.

However, there are several elements which can be seen in every culture. They can change from time to time. Language, religion, literature, dress are some of the examples for cultural elements. You can get a good knowledge about elements of culture by studying the following diagram.

For free distribution

Religion

Knowledge

Beliefs and faiths

Customs and observances

Rules, regulations and traditions

Arts and crafts

Food & beverages

Costumes

Literature

Language

Elements ofculture Education

Activity 3.1

• Form a simple definition with what you understood as culture.• Name three cultural events and supply each an example.

Features common to all cultures

Culture may differ from society to society. Therefore, one culture differs from another. However, there are also many features common to all cultures. For example, language, religion, customs and traditions, cultural features and rituals, are common to all cultures. Especially as a member of a multi - cultural society, it is important to identify features unique to each culture as well as features common to all cultures. Features common to all cultures can be identified by studying the diagram given below:

For free distribution

EducationBestowing culture

CustomsRespecting elders

Food and beveragesRice, Vegetables, Fruits

Example -

Features specific to each culture

You have already learnt that there are features common to all cultures. We can also notice features specific to each culture.

Ethnicity, religion, languages and occupation are a few factors that bring about differences between one culture to another. For example, Sri Lanka consists of many ethnic groups such as Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim, Burgher and Malay. It can be pointed out that every ethnic group has its own culture and cultural features inherent to it.

Reasons for cultural diversity

 Ethnicity  Religion  Language  Occupation  Life style

One culture differs from another culture. Based on the factors such as ethnicity, religion, language and occupation,. The ability to distinguish one culture from the other based on the above factors is known as cultural identity.

For free distribution

It is essential to identify this cultural identity when we live in a multi - cultural society. Identifying cultural features and respecting them and not condemning them should be of paramount importance in such a society. It will build a strong inter relationship among cultures. It will make a good society and minimize conflicts in the society.

Cultural diversity in Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka is the best example for a multi - cultural society. Sinhalese, Tamil and Muslim communities have been living in this country with a strong brotherhood for many centuries. In addition to that Burgher and Malay communities have also been living together as Sri Lankan communities.

In terms of religions, Buddhist, Hindu, Islam, Christian and Catholic communities live together. Religious co-existence has been well maintained. Most of the religious places have become common sacred places for the people of all religions. For example, Kataragama Dewala, Nallur Kovil, Madu Church, Thalawila Saint Anne's Church, Adam's peak are some of those sacred places worshipped by all people in common. Devotees of all religions visit these places irrespective of their religious differences.

Sinhala, Tamil and English are the main languages in our country. It is commonly seen in our schools that, Sinhalese children speak Tamil and English fluently while Tamil children speak Sinhala and English fluently. It is a commendable and praiseworthy situation. It is also essential to learn to speak, and write the languages used in the country in addition to our mother tongue.

Thus, our society is known as a multi - cultural society because there are different communities, religious groups as well as different language users. It is essential to work peacefully and cooperatively in such a multi - cultural society. You all must have determination to live in such a society peacefully and with harmony.

For free distribution

Multi cultural features in Sri Lanka

Communalbasis

Sinhala

Tamil

Muslim

Burgher

Malay

Other

On religious basis

Buddhist

Hindu

Islam

Christian Catholic

According to occupation

Farming

Government employees

Business

Self employment

Fishing

Other

Sinhala

TamilAccording to language

English

Features unique to different religions and ethnic groups

There are different cultural features which are unique to different ethnic and religious groups. Language, religion, patterns of drawing, arts and crafts, and education are some of the common features of a culture. However, those cultural elements can differ from one ethnic group and religion to another. For example, there are several religions followed by different ethnic groups such as Sinhala, Tamil and Muslims in Sri Lankan multicultural society. Cultural festivals which belong to each religion can differ in the way they are celebrated. Some of the festive occasions related to each religious and ethnic groups are as follows.

For free distribution

Figure 3.1 - Sinhala and Tamil new year

Figure 3.2 - Thaipongal Festival

Figure 3.3 - Vesak/ Poson festival

Figure 3.5 - Hajj festivalFigure 3.4 - Catholic festival

For free distribution

Figure 3.6 - Christmas

In addition to these there are other occasions in which cultural features can be identified. For example, weddings, funerals, weaning ceremony, hair cutting, house warming ceremony, etc. Customs & rituals followed in those cultural festivals vary from community to community. It can also vary from religion to religion.

Cultural Heritages

Every culture has cultural elements which are identified as cultural heritages. Customs and rituals; arts and crafts; can be given as examples for cultural heritages. It is a responsibility as well as a duty of all to preserve those cultural heritages and to pass them to future generations.

Protecting the cultural heritages is important for ensuring continuous existence of a culture. It helps developing pride about ancient heritages and protecting uniqueness and identity of a culture. Especially, religious and ethnic groups have their own identity. It can be protected only if the cultural heritages are preserved and handed over to the future generation.

People will be trained to respect other cultures, their customs, practices, arts and craft only if they protect their own cultural heritages. As a good citizen of a multi-cultural society, respecting and protecting other cultures, their heritages are of paramount importance for the co-existence in the society.

For free distribution

² Collect information on some cultural heritages available in Sri Lankan society. ² Classify them in terms of ethnicity, religion, and languages. Build up a slogan on the importance of safeguarding those heritages. ² Exhibit it in the classroom.

Activity 3.2

Steps to safeguard cultural heritages

Each culture has its own cultural heritages. It is the duty and the responsibility of all of us to safeguard those cultural heritages. This will definitely be helpful to preserve the culture for the future generations. It will also create pride about one's cultural identity. As examples shrines, dagoba and the irrigation system in the Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa areas express the grandeur of Sri Lankan culture.

As a citizen, following steps can be taken to safeguard the cultural heritages.

• Creating awareness among people about the importance of safeguarding cultural heritage.

• Refraining from engaging in harmful activities against culture and Preventing those who harm it.

• Whenever one destroys the cultural heritages, the relevant institutions should be informed. Ex :- Institutions such as Police, Department of Cultural Affairs, Department of Archeology

For free distribution

² Write a short essay on the importance of safeguarding cultural heritages and exhibit it in a wall paper.

Activity 3.3

Figure 3.7 - Gal Viharaya StatueFigure 3.8 - Moonstone

Figure 3.9 - Lotus pondFigure 3.10 - Parakrama Samudraya

Figure 3.11 - Samadhi StatueFigure 3.12 - Sigiriya

For free distribution

Figure 3.13 - Katharagama TempleFigure 3.14 - Madu Church

Figure 3.15 - Dawatagaha MasjidFigure 3.16 - Jaffna Nallur Kovil

It is the responsibility of every citizen to protect cultural elements of each culture. By doing that we can easily pass down the existing culture to the future generations. It will also create pride and esteem in them. For example, temples, stupas, tanks, irrigation and other cultural elements expose the pride of Sri Lankan culture to the world.

We all have a legal as well as a moral bond to safeguard cultural heritages. This desire should evolve in our mind naturally and with out a deliberate effort. We must determine to protect cultural heritages archaeological as well as for their physical value, without destroying them for our personal benefits. Different rules and regulations have been enacted to protect them mainly due to their archaeological importance. You may have seen in newspapers, televisions and in other media, the

For free distribution

instances where people have destroyed these valuable cultural heritages for their temporary benefits. It is our duty and responsibility to raise a voice against such people. Through those actions, we can legally interfere for safeguarding cultural heritages.

Many cultural heritages have been accepted as world heritages. Unless they are protected the future generation will lose them.

We all are morally bound to safeguard cultural heritages. Legal bond as well as moral bond are essentially important. You have the right to raise voice against the destruction of cultural heritages which reveal our identity to the world. It is a morality based responsibility.

Transmitting culture through the family

Family is the basic unit which transmit culture from one generation to the other. It passes elements of a culture to another generation. Mother, Father, elder brothers and sisters, grand Mother, Grand Father and the other relatives undertake the task of passing or entrusting the culture.

For example, Sinhala and Tamil New Year rituals such as boiling milk, consuming food, engaging in transactions, anointing with oil are done by the elders in the presence of children. It will train the children to follow the same rituals in the future too. Thus, the family contributes directly to transmit the culture to the future generations. In addition to that, the school, religious places, elderly people and neighbours also contribute to pass down the culture.

Figure 3.18 - Dealing with the well

Figure 3.17 - Boiling milk

For free distribution

Figure 3.20 - Anointing oilFigure 3.19 - Enjoying food

² The main function of the family is to pass the culture to the next generation. Think of a few cultural heritages you got from your family. ² Discuss them with your friends. ² Note down a few of them in your exercise book.

Activity 3.4

² Name a few cultural heritages which belong to your culture. ² Collect details of two cultural heritages which you like most out of the above.

Activity 3.5

For free distribution

Importance of safeguarding culture

All the ethnic as well as religious groups make attempts to preserve (protect) and maintain culture. The reason is that it will support to safeguard the cultural heritage. For example Sri Lankans had been able to bring about several evidences of the fact that the culture of this country has shown to the world the identity of Sri Lankan culture or nationality. Hydraulic civilization, stupas, temples, folk life based on agriculture, religious rituals are some of the finest examples of Sri Lankan identity.

Figure 3.21 - IrrigationFigure 3.22 - Ruwanwelisaya

Figure 3.23 - Hindu KovilFigure 3.24 - Catholic Church

It is important to safeguard culture in order to build up national harmony. For example, it is important to respect other cultures while safeguarding one’s own culture. Consequently suspicion, hatred, jealousy and any other hostile feelings will be eliminated. It will help to build up national harmony. Especially it will contribute to create “Sri Lankan” consciousness.

For free distribution

In a multi cultural society, living in coexistance while safeguarding cultural heritages of all the communities leads to the growth of national pride.

Symbols that reflect National identity

Most of the countries in this modern world are multi - cultural societies. Many ethnic, religious and language groups live within the same country. This is known as a multi - cultural social system. Each group has its own unique identity which should essentially be protected by all. If not, there is the possibility of erupting hostilities and conflicts, among their groups.

In a multi-cultural society, if all citizens could work as united, collective, groups with social integrity it will help to build up national identity.

For example, if all the Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims, Catholics and Christians and those who speak Sinhala, Tamil and English work with a “Sri Lankan” consciousness, it is called national identity.

Sri Lanka has several symbols which symbolize national identity. They are National flag, National anthem, National emblem, National tree, National Flower, National bird and National Sport.

National Flag

National flag is conspicuous among all the other symbols which symbolize national identity. It has been designed on the basis of old royal flag used by King Sri Wickrama Rajasinghe. The national flag we use today in our country is also called the 'Lion Flag'.

For free distribution

Figure 3.25 - National flag

The national flag we use today in Sri Lanka is a flag made under recommendations of the flag committee appointed on 6th March 1948 by Hon D.S. Senanayake who was the first Prime Minister of Sri Lanka. Members of the national flag committee were

² Hon. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike (chairman of the committee)

² Hon. Sir John Kothalawala

² Hon. J.R. Jayawardhane

² Hon. T.B. Jayah

² Dr. L.A Rajapaksha

² Hon. G.G Ponnambalam

² Senator Hon. Nadesan

² Dr. Senarath Paranawithana (secretary of the committee)

Parliament passed the National flag prepared according to the proposals of the flag committee on the 2nd of March 1951. It was hoisted in the flag mast infront of the old Parliament on the 31st of March 1951. In 1972, traditional bo leaves which were in the flag were removed and the four bo leaves of the present day were added.

For free distribution

The symbols of the National Flag represents

Yellow colour lion – Sinhala nation, discipline of the Sinhala community. bravery, dignity and leadership, fairness of the nation.

Yellow colour sword held in the right hand – piousness, law abide while safeguarding the motherland by governing the country in fairness.

Four bo leaves in the four corners on a red background – respect for all the sublime qualities of all religions including the four sublime states of the mind, namely, loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy and equanimity.

Dark red background (maroon) – life blood of all the people of Sri Lanka and representation of the ancient Sinhala Royal flag.

Green and yellow columns on the left side of the flag – Tamil community represented by the yellow column, Muslim community by the green column.

Yellow band of equal width around the flag – unity among all the communi-ties, peace, wisdom, and mutual understanding.

Mane of the lion head and bend in the upper part of the tail – equality between the ruler and the subjects.

Article 6 of the present Constitution of Sri Lanka refers to the National Flag and it is depicted in the Second Schedule.

"The National Flag of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be the Lion Flag depicted in the Second Schedule.”

The standard of the present national lag of Sri Lanka has been prepared by the Sri Lanka Standards Institute. The last amendment of our National Flag which was introduced on 22nd May 1972 was standardised by Sri Lanka standards institute on 7th May 1985.

Reference is also made to the proper design, dimensions and colours of the Sri Lanka National Flag as laid down in Sri Lanka Standard Specification SLS 693; 1985, was published by the Sri Lanka Standards Institute.

For free distribution

The occasions in which the national flag is hoisted

• In state festivals• In national festivals• In state leaders' summits• In an important function of a school or in an institution • Other special functions.

Factors that should be considered in displaying the national flag Hoisting it in a visible place

 Hoisting the flag by keeping the two vertical colour columns close to the flag pole

 Giving priority in all the functions and ceremonies

 When hoisting it with flags of other countries it should be placed in equal height / other flags should be placed on the left side of the Sri Lanka National flag /all the flags should be of equal size

 When hoisting it at night the respective place should have enough light

 When hoisting with regional flags, flags of societies, schools and committees the National Flag should be placed in the middle of them rising high above all of them

 When hoisting flags on several posts closely it should be raised up first and lowered finally

 Flag should be hoisted in a way that lion stands parellel to the ground when it is displayed in the middle of a street

 When the flag is used in processions (Perahera) it should be carried on the right

 When taken with other flags, it should be carried in the middle part of the front area

 When the national flag is diplayed at balcony or infront of a building, it should be placed at an angle of 450 and not horizontal.

For free distribution

Figure 3.26 - Extract : The code of rules for the use of National Flag (1987) P 29,34,35

Hoisting the National FlagHoisting in the streetHoisting 450

slanted

Rules to be followed when hoisting national flag in a ceremonial function

 Before hoisting it, the flag should be fixed to the cord and the folded flag should be kept at a higher elevation.

 The person hoisting the national flag should stand in attention and the others should also stand in attention facing the flag

 Hoisting and lowering the national flag should be done slowly with honour

 Playing Magul Bera (ceremonial drums) and blowing the conch shell whenever it is possible while hoisting

 After hoisting the flag everybody stands in attention and sings the national anthem

Rules to be followed when placing the national flag at half mast

 It should be kept at half-mast only on special occasions as day of mourning declared by the government

 Initially the flag should be raised to the top of the flag post and lowered to the place where the flag is kept at half mast

For free distribution

 The flag should be lowered 1/3 of the height from the top. Before the flag is lowered at the end of the day it should be raised to the top again and then lowered

Rules to be followed when hoisting the national flag educational institutions

 Hoisting at the begining of each school term and at the begining of months in each term

 Hoisting on special days declared by the government

 On special occations such as prize giving, and sports meet

Things to be avoided when using the national flag

 Displaying damaged and deformed flags

 Using for any form of decoration

 Displaying the lion upside down

 Flag in contact with the ground or dragging on water

 Using it as a garment or a cover

 Keeping any symbol, picture, or drawing on the flag

 Using as a sportswear (A badge of the national flag can be stitched to the upper part of the dress of military, fire brigade, and police personnel)

² Hoist the national flag using correct postures, under the guidance of your teacher.

² Test the method of hoisting the National Flag half mast, guided by your teacher.

Activities 3.6

For free distribution

National Anthem

National flag as well as national anthem symbolizes the identity of a nation. The national anthem in Sri Lanka is "Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Mathaa". It was composed by Mr. Ananda Samarakoon. Our national anthem was sung for the first time on the 4th of February in 1948 in the first Independence Day ceremony.

National anthem is important in creating an esteem, love, faith and respect in the minds of the citizens of the motherland. It creates a sense of equality since it represents all ethnic, religious and language groups in a country.

Occasions in which the National Anthem is sung

• In national festivals• In state festivals• In ceremonies of state leaders held in Sri Lanka• In school and other important festivals• In international sport events which Sri Lanka is represented

Background of making National Anthem in our country

When it was about to gain independence a national anthem was not in use. Therefore the responsibility of selecting a national anthem by a competition was assigned to Lanka Gandharwa sabha. A Sinhala and Tamil panel of judges was appointed to consider the language and concepts of the songs received for the competition. The members in the panel were

Mr. S. L. B. Kapukotuwa

Mr. L. L. K. Gunathunga

Mr. Lionel Edirisinghe

Mr. P. B. Ilangasinghe

Dr. O. H.D.A. Wijesekara

Mudliyar. E.A. Abeysekara

For free distribution

This competition was held on the 31st of January 1948. Though the song "Namo Namo Matha" written by the musician Ananda Samarakon was also presented, the song "Sri Lanka Matha Pala Yasa Mahima Jaya Jaya" written by Mr. P. B. Ilangasinghe and Music edited by Mr. Layanal Edirisinghe won the competition. Accordingly, this song was sung at the first independance day celebrations held on the 4th of February 1948. As this song was compiled by two of the judges in the panel people protested and the song was deleted from usage. Thereafter the song composed by Ananda Samarakon "Namo Namo Matha" was sung as the National Anthem in the second independence day celebrations. On the 22nd of November 1951 the cabinet decided this song should become the National Anthem. Later the first sentence was changed as Sri Lanka Matha instead of Namo Namo Matha.

1978 constitution declares that the National Anthem of our country is "Sri Lanka Matha". Lyrics and the music composition has been included in the constitution as a schedule.

National Anthem of the Republic of Sri Lanka is "Sri Lanka Matha" The music and the lyrics of the national anthem is included in the third schedule.

The amendments in the national anthem should be done after passing the proposal in the parliament and the public approval is obtained through a referendum.

Lyrics of the national anthem is included in the front pages in all the textbooks provided to you free. It is your duty and a responsibility to pronounce the words accurately with the proper chords and sing it aloud. When it is sung, it should be honoured by standing at attention.

For free distribution

Figure 3.27 - Standing at attention when singing the National Anthem

State emblem

State’s emblem is the symbol of the state. It symbolizes the rule of the state. State emblem which is being used at present was introduced in 1972. The state emblem was designed in order to celebrate Sri Lanka becoming a Republic on the 22nd of May 1972. You have noticed that the emblem is being used to confirm the state ownership. Currency notes, letterheads of ministries and departments, passports, national identity cards are a few in which state emblem is placed. The ownership of the state emblem and the authority to use it belongs to the Executive President. It is our responsibility and duty to honour and protect it.

During the British Colonial Era, British Emblem with the Lion and the Unicorn had been in use. After the Independence, an emblem with the lion inside a circle of petal design, a crown on top and the word Lanka at the bottom was used.

The state emblem in use today was created by the artist named S.M. Senevirathne. The symbols used in the Emblem represent the following.

For free distribution

Dharmachakra - (The wheel of doctrine) - Piousness

The stalks of rice - Prosperity

A lion bearing a Sri Lankan sword in its right forepaw - Country and the desciplined nation

Petal design around the lion - Purity

A traditional grain vase - Perfectness

The sun and the moon - Eternal existance

National Tree

National Tree of Sri Lanka is Ceylon Ironwood (Na tree). The botanical name of it is Mesua ferrea L.M. Ceylon Ironwood tree has been recognized as the National Tree of Sri Lanka from the 26th of February 1986.

Figure 3.28 - State Emblem

For free distribution

There are several reasons to select Ceylon Ironwood tree as the National Tree. They are;

Being endemic to Sri Lanka

Usefulness

Historical and cultural importance

Beauty and the pleasantness

Availability around the island

Not being used as a State emblem in any other country

Figure 3.29 - Ceylon Ironwood TreeFigure 3.30 - Ceylon Ironwood Flower

From time immemorial, Ceylon Ironwood tree has been worshipped with reverance. According to Buddhist literature, Buddhas named Mangala, Sumana, Revatha and Sobitha have attained enlightenment under the shelter of Ceylon Ironwood trees. There is a belief that Maithree Bodhisattva would attain enlightenment under a Ceylon Ironwood tree. It is believed that Gauthama Buddha on his first visit to Sri Lanka visited Mahiyanganaya and planted a Ceylon Ironwood tree.

For free distribution

Names for Ceylon Ironwood tree in different languages

Sinhala - Na

Tamil - Naaha Maram ^ehf kuk;&

English - Ceylon Ironwood

Hindi - Nagkeshar

Pali and Sanskrit - Naga

Ceylon Ironwood tree grows in the low wetlands and can be seen in abundance close to temples and shrines. It can also be seen planted along the roadsides for shelter.

The tender leaves of Ceylon Ironwood is pink in colour. Matured leaves turn to green colour. Though timber of the Ceylon Ironwood tree is very hard it is not used for construction purpose other than constructing temples and shrines. It is mentioned that timber of Ceylon Ironwood tree was used for constructing bridges and making ships in the past.

Ceylon Ironwood tree is of high medicinal value. Roots, bark, flowers, pollen, fruits, tender leaves, are used as drugs. Pollen of the Ceylon ironwood tree is used for making perfumes.

National Flower

National Flower of Sri Lanka is Blue water lily. The botanical name of it is Nymphaea nouchali Burm.f. It grows in marshy lands and in reservoirs. It is very soft light blue - purple in colour. It blooms when the sun rises and withers when the sun sets. It is a common feature when two or several plants of Nymphaea family be in the same water, they hybrid. Flowers bloom with variety of new features due to this and this makes the plant popular in landscaping.

For free distribution

Figure 3.31 - Blue Water Lily

The background and importance of selecting the National Flower

There are several factors to select blue water lily as the National Flower. Among them the usefulness, cultural, historical, scientific and aesthetic value are important. In addition, being endemic and not being declared as a National Flower in any other country have also been considered.

Many had the opinion of selecting the Lotus as the National flower. This opinion did not come into light as the National Flower of India was also Lotus. Accordingly, Blue water lily was declared as the National Flower on the 26th of February 1986.

Blue water lily is significant in Buddhist literature, arts, poetry and in indegenious medicine. It has been called by different names such as Indeewara, Nilupul, Niluppala. Buddhist lore in Sri Lanka claims that this flower was two of the 108 auspicious signs found on Prince Siddhartha's footprint. Therefore, it is considered as an auspicious sign. Ancient poets mentioned that Sigiri maids (maidens in the frescoses) held Blue water lily and Lotus. In addition to that Sandesha Kavya (message poem) mention that ladies in the ancient times used Blue water lilies as their earrings. King Kashyapa the first had also named one of his daughters as Uppalawanna comparing her to a Blue water lily.

For free distribution

Blue water lily is of great medicinal value. Bulb, stem, stamen, seeds of the plant are herbs.

Names used in different languages for Blue water lily

Sinhala - Manel/ Nilupul

Tamil - Neelothpala ^ePNyhw;gyk;&

English - Blue water lily

Hindi - Neelothpala

Pali - Neeluppala

Sanskrit - Neelothpala

National Bird

National bird of our country is Ceylon Jungle Fowl. It is found in the jungles throughout the island.

It is an inherent feature of the Jungle Fowl to live in flocks. Fleeing into a higher place in the forest for protection at the slightest sign of danger is a nature of this bird. It makes sounds to communicate about the danger to other members. It may forage for grain, seeds, berries, buds, leaves and insects. It crows at dawn as a daily routine. The poets in the past have written many verses celebrating the sweet sound of the Jungle Fowl. Ceylon Jungle Fowl wander close to human habitats for food. It has significant behavioural patterns such as briskness, facing challenges without retreating, and working in co operation.

For free distribution

3.32 Figure - Sri Lankan Jungle Fowl

Close relationship between the Jungle Fowl and the Sri Lankan rural life is one of the reasons for selecting it as the National Bird. Briskness, outer appearance and being endemic to Sri lanka are few other reasons. It falls in to the category of threatened species. Catching, keeping them in possession, and killing them are punishable offenses. Therefore it is our duty as citizens to protect the bird as a national treasure.

National Sport

The National Sport of our country is Volley ball. Earlier, an opinion was forwarded that Elle should be our national sport. However, due to problems in using Elle for international events, this opinion was changed. This game is important for improving qualities such as unity, participation, peace, tolerance in victory and defeat. This is often played in Sinhala and Tamil New Year Festival, School sport meets and sports clubs.

This was originated in1885, in Holyoke USA. The credit goes to William G. Morgan as the founder of Volley ball. It was introduced to our country in 1916 by an American sports director named Robert Walter.

Playing as a team leads to the victory. It is very important that every player of the team to take the responsibility exclusively to bring victory. Furthermore, Volleyball has been selected as the national sport

For free distribution

of Sri Lanka as it has features such as the possibility for many to play together with less facilities and the popularity in the island.

Figure 3.33 - National sport

Identifying one’s own cultural identity

Cultural elements which a group of people, by an ethnic or a religious group traditionally possess can simply be introduced as their own cultural identity. For example, Buddhists do not sit in equal heights when they sit with elders' and interrupt conversations of the elders as well. It is important to safeguard one’s own culture without harming other cultures. We should not let down, criticize, blame or ignore the others' cultures. As one protects and honours the features of own culture, those of the others should also be protected and respected. It is the duty and responsibility of all good citizens. It creates mutual faith, dignity and coexistence among all cultural groups. Then a conflict free social environment evolves.

What are Morals?

Society is made of a totality of a human group. Whole society should be developed by improving moral values in each person. Morals are the set of good things accepted and followed by a society for a long period of time. Though they are not legally enforceable, they function as a device that controls and operates the whole society.

For free distribution

Morals are human qualities that enrich the person, society and life. They are essential to improve living conditions of people. These morals account for the formation of social relationships as well as a good society. Therefore, morals are human qualities which contribute to the existence of a good society and bring meaning to life.

Morals to be cultivated in a person

• Being disciplined

• Being honest

• Being patient

• Politeness

• Generosity

• Friendliness

• Kindness

• Abstaining from hatred

• Being affectionate Need of morals for the wellbeing of society

It is essential for all the people to follow morals in order to ensure wellbeing of a society. The wellbeing of the society is decided by moralsfollowed by the people in that society.

It is important for us to follow morals and safeguard them in our day to day life. Morals should be respected and followed in our houses, religious places, and working places appropriately.

A person becomes successful in accordance with his qualities. Morals are essential for the personal development of a person. They should be made parts of a person’s character. Thus the morals are essential for the development of a person whereas it should be connected to life in executing day to day activities. Then building a wholesome society will be possible.

For free distribution