==== BLOCKS ==== 

82For free distribution

HEalthy food

08

Finger MilletFinger millet (Eleusine Coracana) is a traditional grain that is popular in Sri Lanka because of its nutritional value. It is called Kurakkan in Sinhala and Tamil. Vitamin B, iron and calcium are all present in abundance in finger millet. It is also rich in dietary fibre and helps in easy digestion. Therefore it is an excellent remedy for constipation as it acts as a natural laxative. It is low in fat content but rich in carbohydrates which makes it good for people who are overweight. The digestion process of finger millet is slow and therefore helps in keeping the blood sugar at a low level. As a result, it has become a favourite food among diabetic patients. This wholesome grain is made into porridge, idli, pittu, rotti, hoppers and bread in various regions. It is increasingly becoming popular as a bakery product and recently its demand has increased considerably as people have become aware of its health benefits. Organically grown finger millet is healthier and safer to eat as there are no harmful chemicals used in growing it.In Sri Lanka, it is grown in Anuradapura, Kegalle Moneragala, Hambantota, Ratnapura, Nuwara Eliya, Ampara, Badulla and Jaffna districts. It is a hardy crop that is well adapted to arid highland areas in Africa and Asia. The crop is now grown on a larger scale in India. It grows best in an environment with medium rainfall, an annual temperature range of 11°C to 27°C and a soil of pH range of 5.0 to 8.2. It is a crop that has great potential if promoted as a healthy food.

83For free distribution

Activity 01

Reading and Writing

Match the following words with their meanings according to the context. Then do activities 01 and 02 in your workbook using those words.

Words Meanings

● potential quantity more than enough● digestion healthy● abundance capacity for development● wholesome medicine, application or treatment● laxative enduring difficult conditions● hardy very dry● remedy the process by which food is converted into substances● arid a substance that helps digestion and prevents constipation

Activity 02

,,Read the passage on finger millet and fill in the grid.

Finger MilletAreas where it is grown in Sri LankaNutrientsBenefitsFood items that can be prepared Required rainfallRequired temperatureRequired type of soil

84For free distribution

Activity 03

Answer the following questions.

1. Which substance in finger millet helps easy digestion?2. What makes it good for people who are overweight?3. Why has the demand for finger millet increased recently?4. Why is finger millet a favourite food among diabetic patients?5. Why is organically grown finger millet safer to eat?6. Describe the enviromental conditions required for growing finger millet.

Activity 04

Study the grid and write a paragraph about rice. Then find similar information about Green Gram and fill in the grid given in your workbook activity 03.

Rice

Areas where it is mostly grown in Sri LankaKurunegala, Ampara, Anuradapura,PolonnaruwaNutrientsCarbohydrates, fat, dietary fibre, vitamin BBenefitsUsed as the staple foodsFood items that can be preparedString hoppers, hoppers, pittu, rottiRequired rainfallAbout 1900 mmRequired temperature21° C to 32°C.Required soilpH range of 5.0-8.0

Activity 05

Speaking

Work in small groups. List the advantages of eating homemade food. Present your list to the class.

85For free distribution

Activity 06

Writing

The following bar graph shows the percentages of children who consumewheat- based food in an urban area. Study the graph and write a description of it.

Percentage of Children who Consume Wheat-based Food Products

40

151050

253035

20

45

Percentage of Children

BreadPastriesString hoppersRotti Biscuits

Food item

Include the following information.

● What does the graph represents ● What information is given in the horizontal axis ● What information is given in the vertical axis ● What is the most eaten wheat-based food ● What is the least eaten wheat-based food

You may use the following words;

Less least many more most equal Using the paragraph you have written as a model, describe the pie chart given in your workbook activity 05 about favourite food items among grade ten students of your school.

86For free distribution

Activity 07

Listening and Writing

Here is a recipe for preparing Kurakkan pittu. Listen to the interview between a chef and a presenter of a radio programme and fill in the missing information.

Kurakkan Pittu

Ingredients

1. .…………………………2. ………………………….3. ………………………….

Method

1) Put the flour in a clay bowl.2) Sprinkle a little...……………… and salt and start mixing the flour.3) Add water as you mix the flour.4) Move the hand in a circular movement.5) Continue this for a …………….. minutes.6) Afterwards, pour some water into another clay pot and tie a clean ……………......covering the mouth.7) Put the pittu dough on top of the cloth. 8) Then cover the dough with another pot.9) Now put the pot on ………………

Pittu will be ready within half an hour.

87For free distribution

Learning Point

Connectives

Study the sentences given below. Note how the connectives in bold are used to join two ideas.

1) Singithi likes to have rice for breakfast while her brother likes string hoppers. While Singithi's brother likes to have string hoppers for breakfast, she likes to have rice.2) Breakfast is the most important meal of the day although many people skip it. Although many people skip breakfast, it is the most important meal of the day.3) Mrs. Perera enjoys preparing pittu even though it takes time. Even though it takes time, Mrs. Perera enjoys preparing pittu.

4) I do not know how to prepare laddu though I have tasted it. Though I have tasted laddu, I do not know how to prepare it .

5) Some people still prefer to eat fast food in spite of its health risks. In spite of its health risks some people still prefer to eat fast food.

6) Whenever Riyaza goes to the market with her mother, she likes to buy manioc. Riyaza likes to buy manioc, whenever she goes to the market with her mother.

Activity 08

Fill in the blanks with a suitable connective from the given list.

in spite of, although, even though, whenever, while

1. I could not find the tin opener ………………….. I searched everywhere in

the kitchen.

2. Mrs. Perera visits the nearby fair to buy vegetables………………………….

she has time to spare.

88For free distribution

3. Everyone enjoyed the meal …………………… the bad cooking.

4.………………… I have heard about Italian food, I have not tasted it yet.

5. Kumaran ordered dosai ……………………… Thanusha decided to have

noodles.

Activity 09

Join the following pairs of sentences using a suitable connective. Make any changes that are necessary.

1. It is difficult to prepare watalappan.

Most people enjoy eating it.

2. Some people still prefer to eat it.

There is little nutritional value in fast food.

3. Mother prepared dinner.

Father laid the table.

4. We enjoyed our food.

We were not hungry.

5. My mother prepares food using finger millet.

She has some free time.

Pronunciation

Activity 10

Speaking

Read the following sentences aloud.

1. Do not spill food.2. Do you think it is polite to talk with your mouth full?3. Do not make any noise while you eating.4. Do not pass cutlery pointing it at the other person.5. Do not serve yourself more than what you can eat.

89For free distribution

6. Food is served in buffet on some occasions.7. I had rotti and hoppers for breakfast.8. Pizza is an Italian food.9. Eating junk food is bad for your health, isn’t it?10.Most people prefer tea to coffee.

Learning PointIrregular Plurals

A large majority of nouns in the English language are pluralized by adding an ‘s’ or ‘es’ to the end of the word. They are called regular plurals. Nouns that do not follow the above rule are called irregular plurals.

Some foreign words form their plurals in the following way.

Singular Plural

syllabus syllabi axis axescriterion criteriaindex indices/indexesmedium mediacurriculum curriculaformula formulae/formulas

Some compound nouns form their plurals in the following way.

Singular Plural

spoonful spoonfulspasser-by passers-byby-way by-waysguest-of-honour guests-of-honour

90For free distribution

Activity 11

Writing

Write the plural form of the following irregular nouns.

Singular Plural

fungus ...........................

phenomenon ...........................

bacterium ...........................

nucleus ...........................

analysis ...........................

appendix ...........................

vertebra ...........................

Activity 12

Form the plurals.

Singular Plural

father- in-law fathers- in- law

sister- in- law .........................

teacher- in –charge .........................

a ten-year-old .........................

notary public .........................

passer- by .........................

commander-in-chief .........................

guest- of –honour .........................