==== BLOCKS ==== 

121For free distribution

SUCCESS

12

Role Play

Teacher : What do you think of this statement?

Rasuni : Well, teacher, does this mean that we have to work hard?

Teacher : Exactly. Anything else?

Ganeshan : Teacher, it can also mean that no one will be there to create the

road of success for us.

Teacher : Ok, anything else to add?

Sazi : Teacher, I think it also means that people who became

successful had to work on their own and not rely on anybody

else.

Teacher : Good all valid points. Can you find some more sayings related

to success?

All : Yes teacher, we can do that.

Activity 01

Speaking

Do you think that the given statement is a valid one? Give reasons.

122For free distribution

The students found some important sayings. Read them aloud.

R. KarunanandaThe olympic spirit is not to win, but to take part, so I came there, I took part in the 10,000 metres and completed my rounds.

Helen Keller We can do anything we want to if we stick to it long enough.

Colin Powell“There are no secrets to success. It is the result of preparation, hard work, and learning from failure.”

Winston Churchill Success is not final, failure is not fatal: it is the courage to continue that counts.

Alexander the Great

There is nothing impossible to him who will try.

Thomas A. Edison

Our greatest weakness lies in giving up. The most certain way to succeed is always to try just one more time.

Mahatma Gandhi“Live as if you were to die tomorrow. Learn as if you were to live forever.”

Activity 02

Now match the sayings with their general meanings. a) You have to work hard to be successful.b) Anything can be done if you try your best.c) You will be successful if you learn from your mistakes.d) You must never give up on your goal until you reach it.e) What is important is not how long you will live but how much you will learn.

123For free distribution

Learning PointIndirect speech

The students described their future plans.

Rasuni said, “I like to work hard. I will become a successful scientist”. (Direct speech)You can report this direct statement in the following manner. Note the change of the present tense verbs into past.

like – liked will – would

Rasuni said that she liked to work hard and would become a successful scientist.(Indirect speech)

Activity 03

Writing

Now write the following in reported (indirect) speech. Add two more sentences on your own.

Ganesh said, “I want to be a professor and I will never give up my idea”.Sazi said, “I hope to become an owner of a large company and I know I can make it”.

He said that he wanted to become a teacher.

I want to become a teacher.

124For free distribution

Activity 04

SpeakingCan you tell something about these people?

Nick Vujicic

Jessica Cox

Activity 05

Speaking

Collect some information about these personalities using the internet newspapers/magazines and make a presentation about them.Find;1. name2. country3. physical challenge4. career5. how he or she became successful

125For free distribution

Activity 06

Reading and Speaking

The teacher asked the students of the Grade 10 class to read on successful persons and write an essay on “The person who inspired me most.” Two friends talk about a newspaper article they have read on a famous person. Role play the dialogue.

Rasuni : Hi! Yoga, what’s up? Yoga : Well, I read the newspaper as usual.Rasuni : Have you found anything interesting to write our essay?Yoga : Of course! An article on a famous artist.Rasuni : My word! I think you have read the same article that inspired me.Yoga : What do you mean?Rasuni : Ok, can I guess what you read?Yoga : Sure, go on guessing. I bet you can’t tell me.Rasuni : Why not? It’s about Charlie Chaplin. Am I correct?Yoga : Wow! Well done! How did you guess it? Did you read it, too?Rasuni : Yes, it said that he started his career at a very early age.Yoga : Yes.Rasuni : Do you have the paper with you?Yoga : Yes, and you know what I did?Rasuni : What did you do?Yoga : I went to the library and borrowed his autobiography.Rasuni : Oh great! Now you can write about him.Yoga : We will get together and write.

Discuss the answers to the following.

1. Name the two friends.2. Do you think that the two friends are interested in something? Why?3. What is the name of the famous person mentioned in the dialogue?4. Do you think that the person mentioned in the dialogue is a successful person? Why?5. Do you think that it is necessary to live in an urban area/big town/big city to succeed? Give reasons.

126For free distribution

Activity 07

Reading

Given below is a part of Yoga’s essay. Read it carefully paying attention to the highlighted words.The person who inspired me most

There are many famous people in this world. People can be famous for many reasons. First, a person can excel in one area and become famous. Also he/she can invent something and become famous. However there are some practical people arround us who show us that we can do many things. Moreover they prove us

that one can become successful not only in one area but also in many different fields. Sir Charles Spencer Chaplin or commonly known as "Charlie" was an English actor, comedian and filmmaker, who became world famous, has proved this very fact. Recently, I read about him in a newspaper. This great person once said, “You'll never find a rainbow if you're looking down”. This statement shows how optimistic he is.

Sir Charles Spencer Chaplin was born on 16th April 1889 in Walworth, London, in the United Kingdom. His parents were singers and actors. After his father’s death, his family had to face many challenges. As a result his mother struggled financially. Hence Charlie’s childhood can be described as one with poverty and hardships. However his mother earned the living by performing on stage. The situation became worse after the illness of Charlie’s mother, Hannah Chaplin. He had to start work at the age of nine. All what he inherited from both his parents were put into practice. Small Charlie’s will power and talent made him a stage actor and comedian. At the age of 19 he moved to the United States and joined Fred Karno Company. Charlie could win the hearts of the audience very soon. In 1913, he entered the cinema world.

127For free distribution

Activity 08

Writing

Yoga has not finished his essay. Use the following points that Yoga gathered to complete the essay.

Charlie Chaplin- started work at the age of nine- performed on stage- became a stage actor and comedian- went to the United States- joined Fred Karno Company at the, age of 19 - entered the cinema world in 1913- became very famous – everybody began to demanded - 1917 became an independent film producer- produced silent films – very popular- the Kid (1921), A Woman of Paris (1923), The Gold Rush (1925), and The Circus (1928) are some of the most popular. - Passed away on 25th December 1977 at the, age of 88

Activity 09

Write a short essay on Dr. C.W. W. Kannangara following the guidelines and finding more information.

Dr. C. W. W. Kannangara- born on October 13, 1884 at Randombe in Ambalangoda- first worked as a teacher- became a lawyer in 1910- founder member of the Ceylon National Congress formed with the aim of obtaining independence for Sri Lanka- Minister of Education from 1931 to 1947- known as the father of “Free Education in Sri Lanka”