==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution115

UNIT 10

FUTURE

Reading

The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) asked readers for their predictions of life in the year 2100. Here is what futurologists Ian Pearson and Patrick Tucker think of the readers’ ideas.

AIt will be necessary to feed 10 billion people and nature will not be able to supply food according to the demand, so oceans will be farmed to obtain food. Furthermore, farming of algae will commence for renewable energy as most of the energy resources will be over in the world.

BPeople will be born with more advanced brains and they will be able to talk with each other using their thoughts. As a result, they will use language less and people will be able to communicate with others from distant locations without any electronic devices.

CDue to many developments in the field of science and technology, people will be able to control weather to their benefit. This will help them to reduce the natural disasters and other harmful effects of nature.

For free distribution116

DPeople are already using different types of electronic currency worldwide and instead, there will be one global electronic currency. This will help people around the world to do transactions more easily and with less time.

EThese space elevators will be an easy way to visit space. This will be a future development in the tourism sector too. But, will it be cheaper so that a majority will be able to use it?

FA majority of plant and animal species will be destroyed due to high resource consumption, overpopulation, and environmental destruction. Therefore, the nature which existed million years ago will only be for display.

GMinor languages will disappear from the world and major languages will remain in the world. All people will use only three languages in order to communicate successfully.

For free distribution117

Activity 1

Writing

Read the predictions and match them with their topic. Write the correct letter against each topic.

1. There will be museums for nature.

2. People will speak only three languages.3. People will start to use one single worldwide currency.4. People will communicate through their thoughts.5. People will farm in the oceans.6. People will make space elevators to travel into space.7. People will control weather.

Activity 2

Speaking

1. What do you think about these predictions?

2. Will they come true? Discuss.

Activity 3

Writing

Form a group and write a prediction for one of the categories mentioned in the article and present it to the class.

For free distribution118

Activity 4

Match the words with the meaning. A B renewable a machine used to raise thingselevator natural home of an animal or planttransaction use as a resourceconsumption buy or sell somethinghabitat do not finish when used

Activity 5

Make predictions and fill in the table.

Things that will be invented

Things that will be changed in your life

Things that will change in the society

Things that will be changed in educationIn the next ten yearsIn the next fifty yearsIn the next hundred years

Activity 6

Writing

Imran, Supun and Johan are members of the Readers’ & Writers’ Club. They are going to prepare a magazine about the future. Two of them prepared some points for their articles. Select one topic and write an essay.

For free distribution119

Nature is in danger• Natural resources are in danger• Increase in cutting trees• Forests may turn into deserts• Environment is polluted• Lead to global warming, rains,

droughts and famines• People will suffer from a number of illnesses• Increase in animal hunting• Balance between animals and

humans• Protect nature to have a healthy

natural environment

Food in future• What people will eat in the future• Take pills instead of food• Food pills are fresher, healthier

and cheaper• Kitchenless homes / saves time• Appearance, smell and taste of food will change• A meal will be in a single,

convenient and portable dose• The impact of this change

Activity 7

Make sentences.

• Forests• The shape, size and appearance of future food• Aeroplanes• Domestic animals• People

will / will not (won’t)

• fly without pilots.• turn into deserts one day.• change.• use pills for their meals.• cook food in the future.

For free distribution120

Activity 8

Reading

Read the text and answer the questions.

Future Through Comics

The stories in the comics published nearly 80 - 90 years ago have become a reality today. Before Neil Armstrong landed on the Moon in 1969 it was mentioned in the “Moon Strollers” comic in 1929. Another similar comic was published in the series ‘The Adventures of Tintin-Destination Moon’ in 1953. “Marvel” and “Amazing Stories” published between 1929 and 1939 were also comics which looked through to the future. Man’s walk on the moon, fitting an artificial heart to a patient were predicted through these stories. In these comics there were special robots that could read the mind of a human. However, there are some situations / incidents mentioned in comics that are yet to come true. They are travelling cities, time travel and living on Mars.

For free distribution121

1. When did Neil Armstrong land on the Moon?

2. When was landing on the Moon mentioned in comic stories?

3. Mention some concepts in comics that may happen in the future.

4. Design a comic story with your friends and present it to the class. Activity 9

Listening

Vishwa prepared a presentation on “Endangered Species.”

Listen to his presentation and identify the animals. Fill in the grid with the correct letter A, B, C, D.

AnimalLetter

Turtle

Panda

Tiger

Blue Whale

For free distribution122

Activity 10

Act out

David’s father, George works as an engineer for aliens in Jupiter. David is going to see him with his mother. They are getting ready.

Mother : Are you ready David?David : Not yet, wait a minute. I have to take the Brain Cap to do my homework and my electric puppy. Oh! I forgot. I didn’t even take my memory chip and my mini robot.Mother : Hurry up! if we get late, we’ll miss the spacecraft to Jupiter. Robot Tony, did you put our bags into our air-car?Robot Tony : Yes, I did.Mother : Don’t forget to look after the iron flowers.Robot Tony : I’ll do that.Mother : David, I think you are ready now.David : Yeah! Just a minute. By the way, did you take your magic stone?Mother : Yes, I took it.David : Well, I’m here.Mother : Robot Tony, phone George and tell him we are just leaving. So, he’ll be in the Space Centre. David, he’ll be ready with DD food pills for you.David : Mm… DD crispy.Mother : It’s a bit cold today. We forgot to take our thermo jackets.

For free distribution123

David : Hey, there’s another thing which we have forgotten. We didn’t take our space licen e. We’ll be held up at the Space Centre if we don’t have it!

• Brain Cap :- Can solve anything by wearing this.• Memory Chip :- Can memorize anything.• Magic Stone :- Can cure any illness by touching it.

Mark whether the following statements are TRUE or FALSE.

1. David’s father is an alien. ( )2. David’s father is coming to see his son and wife. ( )3. David has an electric puppy. ( )4. Robot Tony is their assistant. ( )5. They should have a Space Licence to travel in space. ( )6. David doesn’t like DD food pills. ( )

Activity 11

Imagine that you are David. You meet an alien on Jupiter. What are you going to tell him? Write a dialogue between you and the alien.

s

For free distribution124

Future Continuous TenseThe future continuous tense is formed with will be + the present participle (verb+ing).

We use the Future Continuous to say that an action will be in progress at a particular time in the future.

e.g. :-1. A : What will you be doing at this time tomorrow?

B : I will be doing my homework.

2. When I go home, my little sister will be playing with her doll.

3. Won’t you be coming to the cricket match?

4. I hope it won’t still be raining when the class finishes.

Activity 12

Make sentences.

• People• Robots• Young children • Some animals like cheetah, blue whale and the tiger

will be /will not be (won’t be)

• suffering from respiratory diseases. • working in farms.• growing old.• living on the earth.• carrying books to school.

For free distribution125

Activity 13

Look at the pictures and write suitable questions and answers using the future continuous tense.

e.g.:- What will my sisters be doing at 5 p.m. tomorrow? 1. My sisters ..........................................

Tomorrow at 5 p.m.

2. The students ..........................................

Next Monday at 8.30 a.m.

3. My brother ...........................................

Next week

4. Visal .....................................................

Next month

For free distribution126

5. Ganesh and Nazeer .................................

This evening at 6.00 p.m.

Activity 14Speaking

Guessing GameDraw a picture of you doing an action. Don’t let others see it. Fold it in half so that your friends can’t see the best part of it. Now show the folded picture to the class. Others will guess what you will be doing this time tomorrow.

Enjoy the poem.

The AlienThe alien Was as round as the moon.Five legs he hadAnd his ears played a tune.His hair was pinkAnd his knees were green,He was the funniest thing I’d seen.As he danced in the door Of his strange spacecraftHe looked at meAnd laughed and laughed! Julie Holder

For free distribution127

Activity 15

Read the poem and answer the questions.

1. What is the poem about?

2. What was the shape of the alien?

3. How many legs did he have?

4. Write an adjective from the poem to describe the following.a) ……………………..hairb) ……………………..kneesc) ……………………..spacecraft

5. Find a rhyming word. green -…………….

6. Write the opposites for the following words. a) laughed - …………………… b) strange - ……………………

Activity 16

Reading

Complete the following quotes.

Quotes About Future

The ..................depends on what we do in the ....................

- Mahatma Gandhi(present, future)

............... in the Future .................. that is where you are going to spend the ...........of your life.

- Habeeb Akande(rest, invest, because)

For free distribution128

Math and ................ are the ......................... of the .............. - Bob Becker(life blood, future, science)

Every ............... we think is ................... our future.

- Louise Hay(creating, thought)

The best way to ............... the ............... is to invent it.

- Alan Kay(predict, future)

................. is the law of life and those who look only to the .............. or present are certain to miss the ........... - John F. Kennedy(past, change, future)