==== BLOCKS ==== 

Health and Physical Education

Grade 06

Educational Publications Department

ii

All Rights Reserved

First Print - 2014

Second Print - 2015

Third Print - 2016

Fourth Print - 2018

Fifth Print - 2019

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

murpd; ntFkjpaha; E}ypjidg; ngw;Nwd;mwpT ngUfplNt E}ypjidf; fw;Ngd;jha; ehl;bd; tsnkdTk; E}ypjidf; fhg;Ngd;gy khztUk; gapd;wplNt E}ypijNa mspg;Ngd;

v

vi

vii

Monitoring and Supervision- -- W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayake Commissioner General Educational Publications Department Direction - W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department Co-ordination - Amila Rupasinghe Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Panel of Editors

1. Prof. Pujitha Wickramasinghe - Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo 2. Wasantha G. N. Amaradiwakara - President, Ruhuna National College of Education, Walahanduwa, Galle

3. Dr. Ayesha Lokubalasooriya - Consultant (Community Medicine) Family Health Bureau, Colombo

4. Dr. Neelamani Hewageegana - Consultant (Medical Administration) Director, Health Education Bureau, Colombo

5. Dr. M. Priyatharshan - Medical officer, National Hospital, Colombo 6. Renuka Peiris - Director of Education School Health and Nutrition Branch Ministry of Education

7. Upali Amarathunga - Assistant Director of Education Western Provincial Educational Department, Colombo

8. M.M.A.M.K. Munasinghe - Lecturer National Institute of Education, Maharagama

9. Amila Rupasinghe - Assistant Commissioner / Educational Publications Department

Language Editing

1' Dr. Somarathna - Lecturer, Open University, Nawala

Panel of Writers

1' Prof. Varuni de Silva - - Faculty of Medicine, University of colombo

2' Dr. Harshani Inoka - Scientific Officer Sandanayaka National Science Foundation, Colombo

viii

3' Y. I. H. Wimalasiri - In Service Adviser Divisional Educational Office, Maharagama

4' Vajira Padmini Weerakkody - Teacher Service Dharmashoka College, Ambalangoda

5' K. M. Hanifa - Teacher Service Muslim Ladies College, Colombo

6' Chinthani Ekanayaka - Teacher Service Pannala National School, Pannala

7' Pamodha Senarathne - Parliament translator 8' Thushya Thiruchelvam - In Service Adviser, Zonal Education Office Island, Velanai

9' A. M. Rishan - Teacher Service Mampuri R. C. S. T. Maha Vidyalaya Mampuri, Puttalam

10' S. F. U. Ulfath - Teacher Service Aligar Maha Vidyalaya, Kal-Eliya Proof Reading

1' Rasika Jayakody - Teacher Service St. Pauls College, Milagiriya

Illustration

1' B. P. Samson Wijerathne

2' M. B. Bosinghe Cover Page

1' M. B. Bosinghe

2' Anuththara Mathugama Technical Assistance

1' Ayesha Maduwanthi - Computer Assistant" Educational Publications Department

2' Anuththara Mathugama - Computer Assistant" Educational Publications Department

ix

Message from the Editors

You, who are a lucky child of the nation who can contribute to the betterment of your society, are now going to study the subject “Health and Physical Education” which is introduced to pupils in Grade 6. Studying this subject will pave the way for you to live an active, healthy life full of happiness and pride.

If you have a healthy body, a clear mind and are always capable of interacting with others happily, you are spiritually strong. The aim of studying this subject is to develop in you a range of competencies which integrate the knowledge, attitudes, skills and social relationships required for achieving that purpose.

Identify your body to help maintain good health; adopt correct body postures to enhance your appearance. Be co-operative when working with your peers and face the challenges of life with courage. Spend your leisure effectively. Identify your needs and interests and maintain a balanced life. The knowledge you gain for achieving all these purposes will be complete only if you experience it practically. Therefore, go outdoors with your teacher specially to engage in activities related to sports. Adopt what you learn from this book in your day-to-day activities to better your life.

This book has been designed under the new syllabus that is to be effective from year 2015. Use it with love and care. It contains additional information going beyond the syllabus under “Let us learn more”. That has been included simply for the sake of enhancing your knowledge. Answer the questions given under “Let us test our knowledge” to make certain that you have correctly understood the facts taught through each lesson. Develop your skills by engaging in activities given under “Let us put it into practice” following the directions given by your teacher.

We wish with sincere love that this book will pave the way for you to explore knowledge on Health and Physical Education which will be important to you through out your life.

Board of Editors

x

xi

Contents

1 Let us lead a happy and healthy life 1 1.1 Physical well-being 2 1.2 Mental well-being 16 1.3 Social well-being 25 1.4 Spiritual well-being 31

2 Let us identify needs and desires 40

3 Let us Improve personality through posture 48

4 Let us enjoy our leisure through recreational games 62

5 Let us develop basic athletic skills 79

6 Let us respect rules,regulations and ethics in sports 90

7 Let us get used to healthy food habits 97

8 Let us maintain a healthy body 111

9 Let us improve fitness for a balanced life 122

10 Let us be aware and face challenges 136

xi

xii

1For Free Distribution.

Sanduni and Chamari are two students of the same class. Sanduni's clothes are neat and tidy. She keeps her books in order. She is keen about her studies and sports. She is friendly with everybody and is quite pleasant and happy. On the other hand Chamari's clothes are untidy and her work is not methodical. She is not interested in sports or her studies. Often she is intolerant and appears to be irritable. It is clear to you now that Sanduni appears to possess good habits leading to a healthy and happy life out of the two girls.

In this lesson you can learn about the features of physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being and also the factors required to develop them.

Concept of health

A healthy life is not only the mere absence of diseases and disability but also reaching perfection in physical, mental, social and spiritual well-being.

Let us lead a happy and healthy life

1

2For Free Distribution.

Physical well-being includes good health, minimizing of behavioural patterns which lead to ill health and maintain physical fitness.

What is physical fitness?

Saman and Ajith are two healthy children. Saman's weight appears to suit his height but Ajith is some what fat. When these two children play, Ajith gets tired easily. Saman can play for a long time without getting tired. Saman appears to be more active in his daily activities as well. You will note that Saman maintains a better physical fitness out of these two boys.

Factors and good habits required for proper physical well-being

1. Fresh air2. Clean water3. Hygiene and sanitation4. Healthy food5. Sports and exercise6. Adequate rest and sleep7. Good environment

1. Fresh air

Living in an environment with fresh air is important for physical well-being.

What has to be done to keep the air fresh?• Maintaining vehicles properly to minimise emissions.• Controlling smoke emissions from machinery.• Avoid burning of polythene.• Proper waste disposal and using household waste for producing compost.• Minimize deforesting

figure 1.1

Physical well-being

3For Free Distribution.

You can wear a facial mask in air polluted areas. Pollution of the air can be reduced by growing trees etc. to maintain a clean atmosphere.

2. Clean water

The use of clean water is important for physical well-being. Clean water is required for drinking, bathing, washing etc. It is essential to prevent water from getting polluted and to treat water as a limited resource to be used with care. Boiled and cooled water is suitable for drinking, and water filters also can be used to purify water. A child of your age should drink between 1.5 - 2 liters of water per day. Water can be polluted due to contamination with micro-organisms as well as agricultural chemicals and factory waste. 3. Hygiene and Sanitation

Maintaining personal cleanliness is hygiene. Sanitation is a requirement that is necessary to maintain hygiene (e.g. presence of sufficient water, toilet facilities, waste management etc). As hygiene is affected by sanitation, special attention must be given to sanitation.

Engage in the following good habits and maintain your hygiene.

• Brush your teeth at least twice a day, after meals in the morning and before going to bed.• Wash hands with soap after using the toilet.• Wash hands with soap before preparing or consumption of food• Wash or bathe daily.• Trim your nails and keep them clean.• Pay attention to cleanliness of your clothes, towels, and bed linen• Keep utensils and personal items (plates, cups, combs) the toilet, kitchen etc. , clean.

4For Free Distribution.

Concept of water and sanitation

Figure 1.2

Let us Learn More

The correct method of hand- washing.

³ Your nails must be kept short and clean. ³ Wet your hands with flowing, clean water. ³ Apply soap all over the palms. ³ Rub your hands. Rub the palms together. Rub the outer surface of the palms. Rub between the fingers. Rub the outer surface of the fingers. Rub the outer surface of the thumb. Rub the palm of one hand with the tips of the fingers of the other hand. ³ Wash hands with flowing, clean water. ³ Wipe with a clean cloth or paper serviette, or use an automatic hand dryer.

WASH

WA - WATERS - SANITATIONH - HYGIENE

Let us put it intopractice

Get information about the concept of water and sanitation from your teacher. Make a poster of this concept and demonstrate on the notice board in your class room.

5For Free Distribution.

Figure 1.3 - correct way to wash hands.4. Healthy food

Hygienically prepared balanced meal containing all the nutrients in correct proportion can be called a healthy diet. Attention should be paid to the following regarding the food we eat.• Cleanliness• Free from additives (natural)• Freshness• Hygiene

The amount of food to be eaten should be decided according to one's nutritional status.

5. Sports and exercise

Engaging in sports and exercise helps to achieve physical fitness and good health.

Figure 1.4

6For Free Distribution.

Benefits of engaging in sports and exercises:

• Strengthening of bones and muscles• Strengthening of heart and circulatory system• Development of sports skills• Controlling weight• Provides entertainment and fun.

In order to achieve the above, you should engage in sports and exercise at least for 30-60 minutes every day. Special exercise programmes should be done under correct guidance and supervision. It is also important to be involved actively in day-to-day activities e.g. taking stairs instead of the lift, walking as much as possible specially short distances. Correct postures should be used in day to day activities.

6. Adequate rest and sleep

Adequate rest and sleep are important to maintain physical well-being. A child should sleep at least 8-10 hours every day. The body undergoes growth and repair during rest and mental stress is relieved. Lack of proper sleep reduces the efficiency of the next day. It is better to take small breaks during working hours.

7. Pleasant environment

Pleasant environment is very important for physical well-being. Features of a pleasant environment are:• Fresh air/ adequate ventilation• Adequate light• Trees and vegetation in the environment• Neat, tidy and clean surroundings.

Figure 1.5

Figure 1.6

7For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

5S conceptThis is a Japanese concept that is adopted to keep the living or working environment tidy. This will not only keep the environment clean, systematical and well organized, but also helps to improve productivity and efficiency.

1. Sort (Seiri)Identifying necessary and unnecessary items and removing unnecessary items.

2. Systematize (seiton)Arrange necessary items in order so that they can be easily available.

3. Shine (seiso)Keep the place clean.

4. Standardize (seiketsu)Maintain and improve on the above-mentioned actions at all times.

5. Sustain (shitsuke)Educate others on this concept and continue to work to improve this.

Features that determine physical well-being

Features that determine physical well-being are given below.

1. Nutritional status2. Physical fitness

Figure 1.7

Let us put it into practice

Arrange your classroom and bedroom according to the 5S concept.

8For Free Distribution.

3. Immunity4. Appearance5. Being active

1. Nutritional status

The nutritional condition of a person is called Nutritional status, e.g. optimum nutrition, micronutrient deficiency, malnutrition, obesity.

The nutritional status differs from person to person due to changes in patterns of consumption of food.

Lack of nutrients results in undernutritional states such as short stature (short for age) and wasting (inadequate weight for height). Eating more food than required results in overnutritional states such as over-weight and obesity. All these nutritional problems increase the risk of developing various illnesses. Undernutrition and overnutrition increase the risk of communicable and non-communicable diseases respectively. Consuming healthy food adequately will protect us from diseases, keep us active and ensure proper growth of the body. Thus it is important to maintain a proper level of nutrition in order to maintain optimum physical well-being.

The following indices are used to measure the nutritional status I' Height II' Body Mass Index III' Waist circumference

I' Height

You should have a height that suits your age.Gender-based height-for-age charts are used to determine the suitability of height. Charts 1.1 and 1.2 give the height-for-age charts for girls and boys of 5-19 years respectively. These charts are available in the growth assesment book of your younger siblings.

9For Free Distribution.

Chart 1.1

height according to age for girls (age 5 -19 yrs)

Height (cm)

Zone 3

Zone 2

Age (yrs)

Zone 1 (short stature)

According to the above chart, if the height of a person is below the -2SD line (orange colour zone), that person is considered to be short for his age.

height according to age for boys (age 5-19 yrs)

Height (cm)

Zone 3

Zone 2

Age (yrs)

Zone 1 (short stature)

Chart 1.2Source - WHO

Source - WHO

10For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

Measuring height

Equipment : A measuring tape fixed to the wall

Method :³ Remove shoes.³ Remove hats, clips and hair styles on the crown to make it easy to measure the height up to the crown.³ Stand up turning back to the tape hanging on the wall. Your ankle, calf, buttocks, back of chest and the back of the head should touch the vertical line. Keep head looking straight forward.³ Another person should place a ruler or a wooden stick horizontally on the head (straight and touching the head). Read the height. ³ Note down the height in cm.

The following illustration shows how to measure the height correctly. The points of the body given below should touch the vertical line.

1' Heel 2' Calf 3' Buttocks 4' Back of Chest 5' Back of the head 6' Person must be looking forward

II' Body Mass IndexBody Mass Index is used to decide whether one's weight is appropriate for the height. To calculate the Body Mass Index, weight in kilograms is divided by the square of the height in meters.

Figure 1.8 - measuring height

11For Free Distribution.

E.g : Imagine your weight is 29 kg and height is 1.4m. Then your BMI value is 14.8 kg/m2

Gender based BMI-for-age charts can be used to determine the appropriateness of weight for height of a person of 5-19 years of age. (Charts 1.3 and 1.4)

BMIWeight (kg)Height (m) x Height (m)}

BMI29 kg1.4 m x 1.4 m}}14.8 kg/m2

Chart 1.3

Source - WHO

obesity

overweight

normal

underweight

BMI range for girls (age 5-19 yrs)

Age (yrs)

BMI value

12For Free Distribution.

Mark your BMI value in the chart according to the age and gender. Identify the zone you belong according to your BMI.

Source - WHO

Orange - UnderweightGreen - Appropriate weight for heightLight Purple - OverweightDark Purple - Obesity

obesity

overweight

normal

BMI range for boys (age 5-19 yrs)

Age (yrs)

BMI valueunderweight

Chart 1.4

13For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

Measuring weight

Equipment: A scaleMethod:³ Wear light clothes.³ Remove shoes and everything in pockets. ³ Remove coats or jackets worn over the school uniform. ³ Make sure the scale is at the value of 0.³ Stand straight on the scale. Keep your hands free and relaxed by the sides of the body. ³ The body should not touch or lean against anything, and the head should be straight. Look forward (You should not look at the scale). ³ Read the value indicated on the scale with the help of another person (a friend).³ Note down the weight in kg.

Let us put it into practice

Measure your height and weight. Ask your teacher or an adult to calculate the BMI Value.Decide the nutritional status using the charts.

III. Waist circumference

Waist Circumference is the measurement taken around the waist. Fat is mostly deposited in the body around this area in the abdomen and this adversely affects our health. The deposition of fat around the abdomen is a major risk factor for the development of non communicable diseases. Therefore it is very important to maintain an appropriate waist circumference. The ratio between the waist circumference to the height can be used to determine the appropriateness of the waist circumference.

Figure 1.9 - measuring weight

14For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

Measuring the waist circumference

Equipment : A flexible measuring tapeMethod:³ The following illustration (Figure1.4) shows how to measure the waist circumference correctly.

³ On the vertical line coming down from the armpit, mark the lowest part of the ribs, the upper part of the hip bone. ³ Then mark the mid point between these two points. Do this on both sides of the body.

³ Keep the tape horizontally on these two positions marked. The person should be relaxed at this moment.

2. Physical fitnessOur ability to engage in daily routine activities effectively is called physical fitness.

When we do day-to-day activities, sports and exercise our body becomes tired. If we can do such physical activities for a long time and return to normal status quickly, that shows that we have a high degree of physical fitness.

Waist to height ratio should be less than 0.5.Waist circumference (cm)Height (cm)

waist circumference should be less than half of one's height.

Figure 1.10Measuring waist circumference

below armpit

upper part of hip bone

measuring tape placed horizontaly

15For Free Distribution.

If the physical fitness is high, one can do day-to-day activities easily and display higher talents in sports.

3. Immunity

Some students of the class often get absent because they fall ill. There are students who often fall ill but some do not. What is the reason for this?

Germs enter our body and cause communicable diseases. Immunity of the body protects the body against these germs. Good nutrition, healthy habits and exercise improve immunity.

4. Appearance

We can improve our appearance by maintaining the cleanliness of clothes, hair, teeth, nails, skin and also by adopting correct postures in day-to-day activities. Pleasant appearance is also a feature of mental well-being, and it improves social well-being too.

5. Being active

Engaging in day-to-day activities happily and enthusiastically without being lazy is a feature of a person with good physical well-being. Maintaining a correct posture helps to improve activeness. All factors mentioned above are also important for improving activeness.

Figure 1.11

16For Free Distribution.

One day on the way home after school, Piumi and Amali met a stranger. He asked them for the directions to the school. After receiving the required information, the stranger gave them a bag full of toffees. Both Amali and Piumi had the desire to take it .

Then they had a discussion but they were careful not to let the stranger hear them.

Piumi( Amali (

Piumi(

Amali (

Piumi( Amali (

Then both of them set out for home.

You must have noticed how Amali and Piumi acted with intelligence and assertively during the incident and escaped a possible dangerous situation tactfully.

So, what is mental well-being? How can it be identified?

According to the World Health Organization, mental well-being is the ability to identify your skills, to face the challenges in day to day life successfully, work effectively, serve society and live happily.

Mental well-being helps us to live happily and successfully.

Let's take it.No. Mother has told us not to take anything from a stranger

But this person seems good. He only asked the directions to school.But we don't know him quite well. So don't take it. Don’t you remember, this morning our health teacher too advised us not to take anything from strangers.But how can we refuse now?We have to have our lunch. So we don't want toffees now. Thank you very much.

Mental well-being

17For Free Distribution.

Good habits for mental well-being

There are good habits that can be practiced to maintain mental well-being. They are:

1. Engaging in sports activities2. Engaging in aesthetic and creative activities3. Engaging in a hobby4. Leading a simple life style5. Time management6. Counselling7. Meditation.

1. Engaging in sports activities

Working cooperatively with a team and accepting both victory and defeat happily can be learned through sports. We can also gain physical as well as mental comfort through sports. Sports improve health as well as prevent illnesses . Therefore, it is good to engage in a sport daily as a habit.

2. Engaging in aesthetic and creative activities

Aesthetic activities such as listening to music, singing, playing musical instrumensts, dancing or drawing sooth our mind and provide entertainment. Activities such as creative writing (poetry or short stories), stitching and other hand work make us happy.

Figure 1.12

Figure 1.13

18For Free Distribution.

3. Engaging in a hobbyFor instance, cycling, swimming, collecting stamps, listening to music etc. or any good activity that brings one happiness.4. Leading a simple life style

A simple life style means getting only what you need and being satisfied with it. If we can get used to a simple life style, we can avoid many problems. There are things that are not really essential but one may like to have them. These are called desirables. Desires are endless and craving for desires makes our life problematic. Therefore, leading a simple life helps to maintain mental well-being.

5. Time management

Understanding the daily activities well and planning them according to priorities within a given time frame is time management. You can get your parents' and elders' support for this. Working to a time table, avoiding postponement of work, timely preparation etc., help to manage time. When you complete a task on time you feel free and relaxed. This helps you to face challenges, especially examinations and competitions without stress.

6. Counselling

You may have to face various stressful or problematic situations in everyday life. In such situations, it is advisable to consult or discuss about them with your friends, teachers, parents or any other suitable elder and get their advice appropriately. “Suwa Sariya” of the Ministry of Health Education and “Mithuru Piyasa” in hospitals, provides counselling. You can also get the help of the counselling unit of your school.

Suwa sariya Telephone - 0710107107 / Web Site-www.suwasariya.gov.lk

19For Free Distribution.

7. Meditation

You can commence meditation practice by relaxing in a comfortable posture closing your eyes and concentrating for a few minutes. Qualities such as concentration, paying attention and tolerance can be improved by engaging in meditation from a young age according one's religion. Let us put it into practice

Meet the teacher of the special counselling unit of your school and discuss how you can receive that service.

Skills and characteristics of a person with mental well-being

1. Self-understanding and self-esteem2. Decision making3. Problem solving4. Coping with stress5. Critical thinking6. Creative thinking7. Emotional balance8. Being happy and lively9. Self-discipline

Think about other points that could be included.

1. Self-understanding and self-esteem

Self-esteem is the trust that you have in your abilities. It reflects your overall emotional evaluation of your own worth. You should have a correct evaluation of your emotions, ideas, expectations and talents. Self-esteem can be achieved through self-understanding. This self-esteem is not mere arrogance, but a pride that comes from understanding one’s talents and limits. A person who has self esteem can face challenges with confidence.

Figure 1.14

20For Free Distribution.

Your talents, skills, good qualities, pleasant behavior and association with good friends help you to develop your own value and self- esteem.

2. Decision making

Decision making is choosing the best option when we do something. When making a decision, think of the positives and negatives, advantages and disadvantages and how it would affect you and others. Make use of your knowledge, experience and what you learn from day-to-day incidents. When your knowledge is not adequate regarding a particular situation, it is always useful to consult a person with more knowledge and experience. You should be flexible and listen to others when a decision is made as a group. Avoid being emotional and hasty when making a decision.

3. Problem solving

Problems faced by us in our day to day life should be solved calmly and intelligently. To solve a problem successfully, first it should be identified correctly. There could be several options when solving a problem. You should explore all the options available and intelligently choose the best. You should also consider others' experience as well. When you cannot solve a problem by yourself, you can consult others.

Amali and Piumi faced a problem. They solved it through discussion.

Figure 1.15

21For Free Distribution.

4. Coping with stress

We have to face various challenges in day-to-day life. Situations such as facing an examination or a competition, being bullied after entering a new school, a friend leaving the school etc., can cause stress. First we should find the reasons for our stress and then find solutions for them. We can consult a trustworthy experienced person in finding a solution. It is important to have such a trustworthy person by us when we face a stressful situation. The person can be a parent, teacher, sibling or a friend.

We should be strong enough to accept things that cannot be changed in life and accept them as they are. We should be able to tolerate both victory and defeat alike and be happy at another’s victory as well.

5. Critical thinking

Thinking carefully, intelligently and logically is called critical thinking. We should think of the good and the bad, advantages and disadvantages as well as different angles of looking at a situation. This is useful in making correct decisions.

Activities that can be practised to cope with stress in life successfully

• Sports• Aesthetic activities• Hobbies • Time management • Accepting an amount of work one can cope• Meditation

Figure 1.16

22For Free Distribution.

6. Creative thinking

Creative thinking is developing new and novel ideas. Activity can be done more attractively and fruitfully. Creative thinking leads to inventions and productivity. Creative thinking can be used to face day-to-day problems and challenges successfully.

7. Emotional balance

An emotion is a sudden mental state which causes internal and external changes in a person. Emotions can be described as powerful, sudden thoughts that come into ones mind. There may be pleasant emotions such as happiness sympathy, kindness etc. and unpleasant ones such as anger, fear, sadness, jealousy and greed etc. Emotional balance is an adoption of a balanced behaviour by intelligently considering the facts without being over powered by emotions.

What can you do when you have a harmful emotion?

• Avoid what is causing it• Think of something different or distract yourself• Count from 1 to 10 before you act• Inhale and exhale deeply• Drink a glass of water slowly

Your reactions to pleasant emotions such as happiness should not affect yourself and others.

Figure 1.17

23For Free Distribution.

8. Being happy and lively

Being lively is the mental readiness to work actively without being lazy. Then one's work can be done more efficiently and productively. If you are happy it can have a pleasant effect on those around you.

Being happy is a positive, pleasant emotion. Behaving without causing trouble or being a nuisance to others and being satisfied with what you do will make you happy.

9. Self-discipline

Every thought that comes in to your mind may not be right. Controlling feeling and emotions to suit the situation, moral values, culture and society can be considered as self-discipline. In simple terms, one should not be a slave to feelings and emotions, but should act suitably according to the situation.

E.g. Waiting in a queue even if you are getting late Respecting road rules Not dumping garbage everywhere.

We should obey rules, not because we are afraid of rules, but because behaving this way makes us happy. It is the way of living without being a nuisance to others.

Figure 1.18

Figure 1.19

24For Free Distribution.

Let us put it into practice

1. Mention how the following talents and characteristics displayed in the incident encountered by Amali and Piumi. Discuss them in front of the class.

Talent / CharacteristicSituation in which it was displayed1. Decision making2. Problem solving3. Critical thinking4. Self discipline5. Creative thinking

2. Explain an instance when you solved a problem through discussion among friends.

3. Describe a situation where a friend faced an unfavorable emotion.

4. Explain an instance when you or a friend took a wrong decision and mention a better decision you could have taken.

25For Free Distribution.

Social well-being is to maintain good relationship with the people around us.

As the new term started, the sports meet became the hottest and the most favourite topic among all, at school. Gemunu House scored the lowest points at the last sports meet. Therefore, this time the sports meet was very special to its members. The teacher in charge of Gemunu House and the students worked hard with dedication, determined to do better this year.

Captain of the Gemunu HouseUpul : If we work hard together this time, we will be able to win. Kasun : Whether we win or not, let's try our best. Indika : How shall we decorate the house tent this time? Upul : Yes, we should think about that too, because the best decoration is given points.Ramani : Shall we collect money from neighbours to spend for the decorations? Kasun : No, let's organize a fair in the school. Upul : That's a good idea. What do you say?All : Yes, that's a good idea. Aswar : What are we going to sell?Indika : Let's bring some home-made food items. I'll bring Aggala.Ramani : Ok. I'll bring boiled manioc. Gawri : I'll bring Laddu. Fathima, can you bring Bundhi?Upul : Kasun, please take over the leadership.Kasun : Ok. Let's have the fair next Friday during the interval. Everybody should bring food items. There's something else we almost forgot. Since this is held inside the school, we have to get the principal's permission.Upul : I'll first discuss this with our teacher in charge. Then we can ask for the principal's permission.

Social well-being

26For Free Distribution.

Kasun : Thank you very much. Fathima, can you please prepare an attractive poster? We can display it on the notice board after we get permission.

The fair was a great success and the students of the Gemunu House managed to collect Rs. 2000/-. They decorated their house beautifully using the money and their creativity. Gemunu House won the first place this time.

In the above story, the success was due to their commitment by working together as a team.

You could see how the students could avoid difficulties and gain victory at the end. We have different relationships with different people in day-to-day life; with our family members, friends and teachers at school, and with many others we meet on the way etc. The success, productivity and friendliness of these relationships display social well-being.

There are good habits that can be practised to develop social well-being. They are:

• Working as a team• Listening to others' views • Respecting others• Being flexible• Working cooperatively with different people.

Working not as an individual but as a team is a significant feature of social well-being. When we work as a team, we should listen and learn to respect others' ideas. Sometimes, we may have to work according to others' ideas. We should always respect others.

Figure 1.20

27For Free Distribution.

People are different in appearance as well as in their actions and ideas. If you work cooperatively and peacefully with those diverse people, you'll be able to live happily. It is important to work cooperatively and respectfully with the opposite gender and be united without any gender difference.

A good concept that can be used to improve social well-being is not treating others in a way we don’t like to be treated.

We can see the following features of a person who demonstrates social well-being . Decide whether the students of Gemunu House displayed those characteristics.

Skills of a person with social well-being

1' Good interpersonal relationship2' Productive communication3' Flexibility4' Empathy5' Leadership6' Follower ship7' Being law-abiding

Think about other points that can be added to this list

Let us put it into practice

Name the members of your family. What are their diverse qualities?Dramatize in groups a situation in which all the family members worked together.

28For Free Distribution.

1. Good interpersonal relationships

This is about various types of relationships we have with various people we meet in every day life. We have to have relationships with helpers and workers as well as friends and parents. Patience, tolerating others' weaknesses, cooperation and flexibility help to build good relationships. If you can maintain relationships with different people appropriately, you will become a pleasant person appreciated by everyone.

If you maintain good interpersonal relationships, you will have:

• more friends in the class• more company• more friendly talk with others• more participation in domestic and public work• less conflicts with people you associate.

See whether you have such features.

2. Productive communication

This includes presenting one's ideas clearly and listening to others' ideas as well. This is very important for good interpersonal relationships.

The way how the students of Gemunu House presented their ideas and listened to one another is a good example of this.

Figure 1.21

Figure 1.22

29For Free Distribution.

Figure 1.24

Figure 1.23

3. Empathy

The ability to understand another person's feeling is empathy.

If you are empathic, you;

• help those who need help

• do not tease the persons with weaknesses

• understand the feelings of a person who is in trouble and act to comfort him

• join in and share others' happiness.

4. Flexibility

Flexibility is adapting to others ideas and respecting them and acting accordingly. You cannot work just on individual wishes when we work as a team, e.g. in the story, Ramani agreed with the majority since they did not agree with her idea.

5. Leadership

In day-to-day life you may have to work as a team leader or under a leader as a member of a team. A good leader guides others to achieve a common goal. A leader has to listen to the ideas and opinions of the other members of the team as well.

The students' effort to do the fair successfully under Kasun's leadership is a good example of this.

30For Free Distribution.

6. Followership

Working cooperatively with the leader in order to reach the goal is followership. This means that, we get together to reach the goal successfully under the guidance of the leader when we work as a team,

e.g. The support given to Kasun by the students of the Gemunu House displays their follower ship.

7. Being law-abiding

We should work according to the accepted rules and regulations at school and in the society. Abiding by the law enables us to live as good citizens,e.g. When students organize fairs, they must get permission according to the rules of school. See the way they faced the situation.

Figure 1.25

31For Free Distribution.

Living happily, having good interpersonal relationships, understanding one's position in society, growing with time and experience are the foundation factors of spiritual well-being.Spiritual well-being creates a peaceful and happy person and he/ she will keep the people around him/her also happy.

There are several basic factors that would help to build spiritual well-being.

1. Enjoying environment, e.g. beach, mountains2. Engaging in music, art or any other aesthetic activities 3. Working collectively 4. Reaching inner peace through meditation, Yoga exercise etc5. Engaging in a sport6. Time management7. Counselling8. Living according to a religion

Friendliness, helping others in need, being happy at others' happiness and bearing happiness and sadness alike are results of spiritual well-being.

Tharindu and Supun are very good at their studies. Tharindu's ambition is to be a doctor and to cure the helpless patients. Supun does not have a clear ambition. Tharindu often takes part in religious activities with his parents. He is very kind and peaceful. He respects elders and teachers. Supun is different. He is not interested in religious activities. He is always sad and moody, and often quarrels with other students.

Can you see the difference between the two students?

Figure 1.26

Spiritual well-being

32For Free Distribution.

Good habits for spiritual well-being

From your childhood make a habit of respecting elders at home and in the neighbourhood.

Stand up when you see an elderly person. Do not retort to them. Help them wherever possible.

Engage in religious activities with your parents every day. Participate in religious rituals and activities in religious places. Going to Dharma school is very important too.

Act according to the moral values that are based on your religion and culture, e.g. worshipping parents. Man is part of nature. Nature is essential for man's existence. Therefore, it is our responsibility to protect the environment. By enjoying the beauty of nature, it relaxes our mind and we gain mental happiness.

Relax, sit down keeping your back straight and close your eyes. Concentrate on inhalation and exhalation. Inhale and exhale consciously.

Stay in any posture and close your eyes. Imagine you are in the middle of a small circle. Wish yourself happiness, contentment and good health. Then expand the circle a little and think that your family is within it. Wish them goodness and comfort. Now expand the circle step by step and increase the number of people within the circle. Thus, wish goodness and comfort to your village, city, country, world and finally the universe.

Sit in a comfortable posture. Close your eyes. Imagine there is a waterfall before you. Enjoy the picture in your mind. Now concentrate on the sound of the waterfall. Feel the water drops scattering from it. Listen to the singing of a bird on a tree close by.

33For Free Distribution.

Worship according to your religion with everybody at home every day. Allocate a little time for that. Shift the responsibility of leading the prayers or worshipping from member to member daily (one person per day).

The qualities of a person who has spiritual well-being

1. Being respectful

Respecting elders, teachers, friends and everybody.

2. Showing kindness

Being kind to helpless old people, animals or any other being.

3. Being grateful

Being grateful to those who helped you.

4. Being Optimistic

Always thinking positively. Attempting to get advantage from a disadvantageous situation.

Figure 1.27

34For Free Distribution.

5. Being peaceful

Always working peacefully with everybody, and disliking aggressive behaviour.

6. Nature-loving

Willingness to enjoy the beauty of nature and protect the environment.

7. Living according to religious and moral values

Living peacefully and humanely according to whatever the religion one's believes in.

Although we have learnt about mental, physical, social and spiritual well being as different components, one cannot differentiate the characteristics as they overlap, e.g. a pleasant appearance is a quality of both physical and mental well-being.

Figure 1.29

Figure 1.28

35For Free Distribution.

Let us read and enjoy the following story with the purpose of confirming what you learnt in this lesson to develop mental and social well-being.

Bathiya ran in to the class room at the end of the interval.Sumeda was sleeping with his head on the desk."Sumeda, Sumeda, wake up, the bell rang."Sumeda lifted his head up. Tears ran down his cheeks."Sumeda, why is this? What happened?" Bathiya sat by Sumeda.

Sumeda was in great pain of mind. He was trying to say something.

Nirmali who was sitting on the chair in front of him looked back."Bhathiya, Sumeda said that he had a headache. He didn't eat either."Bathiya picked up the pen on the floor and put it in Sumeda's pencil case.

"Sumeda, I'll sit next to you."Bathiya sat next to Sumeda till the next period. He helped him to write the essay too.

"Bathiya, I have a big problem." Sumeda told Bathiya on their way to the playground.Bathiya held Sumeda's hand and smiled.

"Sumeda, who doesn't have problems? Even right now my mother is taking treatment at the cancer hospital. Today she is not at home. Father and I steamed a jack fruit before coming to school for myself and my sister to eat when we return after school."

Interpersonal relationships

Stress and emotions

Empathy and interpersonal relationships

Empathy

Interpersonal relationships

36For Free Distribution.

Sumeda was shocked. Bathiya spoke again. "Let's go Sumeda, teacher asked us to bring two volleyballs from the sports room."

Sumeda looked at Bathiya very carefully. Bathiya had a very calm and thoughtful look.

Bathiya joined the physical education lesson enthusiastically with the other students. Because of this, Sumeda too had forgotten his problems. In the last period, Sumeda did all the sums even before Bathiya."Bathiya, how can you smile and live happily like this while you have such a serious problem?"Sumeda asked Bathiya on their way home along the gravel path. Bathiya smiled.

"Sumeda, the biggest challenge before me now is raising my sister, helping my father and doing studies well to have a better life in society.I think everything is in my hands. I think from every angle. If I weep, our whole family will lose."

Sumeda revealed his problem to Bathiya before saying good bye near his home. "Bathiya, my father was working abroad and he returned yesterday. It was only then that my mother told him that I had failed the scholarship exam."

Self understanding, decision making, coping with stress, problem solving and critical thinking

Emotional balance

Decision making, emotional balance and coping with stress.

Decision making, emotional balance and coping with stress

Critical thinking, decision making, productive communication, self understanding, creative thinking and coping with stress

Communication

37For Free Distribution.

"Father got very angry and shouted at me. He told me that he wouldn't give me the bicycle he had brought. Now I don't feel like going home."

Bathiya looked at Sumeda's home. His father came out."Hello, Bathiya putha, come in."Both stepped in. The new bicycle with many ribbons tied around its handle was behind the cabinet. Sumeda's mother gave a big bar of chocolate to Bathiya. Sumeda's father stroked his head tenderly."I heard that Bathiya passed the scholarship exam well. Now are you leaving the school to join one in the town?""Oh, no uncle. I didn't leave our village school.""Ah! Why is that?''

Bathiya described about his mother's condition and his responsibility of his younger sister. This is how he finished ."…… Do you know uncle? Last year one student from our school got selected to the medical college. But he had not passed the scholarship exam."

Bathiya stood up to say good bye.

"Wait Bathiya, have some lunch" said Sumeda's mother.Sumeda's father took out the beautiful bicycle. "Putha, drop him home on this bicycle."

Stress and emotions

Communication, interpersonal relationships and decision making

Problem solving, critical thinking, creative thinking, communication and interpersonal relationships

38For Free Distribution.

Factors/ good habits required for physical well- being

Skills/ characteristics of a person with physical well-being

Factors/ good habits required for mental well-being

Skills/ characteristics of a person with mental well-being

Factors/ good habits required for social well-being

Skills/ characteristics of a person with social well-being

Factors/ good habits required for spiritual well-being

Skills/ characteristics of a person with spiritual well-being

social well-being

physical well-being

Healthy person

spiritual well-being

mental well-being

One should develop proper mental, physical, social and spiritual well -being in order to lead a healthy life. A person with such well-being displays unique characteristics. We should practise good habits and develop life skills to experience that well-being.

Now we know....

39For Free Distribution.

Let us test our knowledge

1. What are the features that can determine physical well-being?

2. What are the three indices that can be used to measure the nutritional status?

3. Mention good habits you should practice to maintain mental well-being.

4. Name four skills which a person with social well-being displays.

5. Give three characteristics of spiritual well-being.

40For Free Distribution.

Let us identify needs and desires

2

Man needs many things to live. These are called human needs. Among them, the essentials for living are called basic needs. Although not essential, those which are needed to live are called other needs.

This lesson is going to be about basic and other human needs, the difference between needs and desires, and your duties and responsibilities in satisfying them.

Basic Needs

Basic needs are the factors essential for us to live. To learn about these essential factors, let us first discuss about the people who lived in ancient times.

People of the Stone Age lived in the jungle. They only needed air to breathe, water to quench their thirst and food for hunger. They could not survive without any of these factors. Therefore, air, water and food can be identified as basic human needs.

41For Free Distribution.

Air - Fresh, clean air is needed for life. But exhaust fumes emitted by vehicles, smoke emitted by factories and smoke that gathers inside houses due to the lack of chimneys as well as cigarette smoke results in air pollution. Inhalation of this polluted air increases the risk of falling ill. Thus, the first basic human need is clean air.

Water -Water is necessary for human survival. A bigger part of the earth is covered with oceans. Although there is sea water in abundance, we cannot use it in our day-to-day needs. Usable water is available only in the water resources such as rivers, inland reservoirs, ponds and springs. This water too can get polluted due to various reasons. Using polluted water is harmful. Everyone has to contribute and take responsibility for having clean water.

Food -Food provides us with the nutrition that is required for energy, growth of the body and protection from disease. We should therefore, consume a clean, healthy and balanced diet that consists of all the nutrients in required amounts. Today various types of chemicals are used in the production of food. Since such chemicals are harmful to health, you have to be careful in choosing food.

Other needs

Let us go back to the discussion on people of ancient times. After air, water and food, which were their basic needs, gradually they thought of fulfilling other needs.

For instance, people of the Stone Age used a cave or a tree burrow as a house to get protection from rain. They learned to make tools with

Figure 2.1

42For Free Distribution.

stones or animal bones. They used these tools to hunt animals for food. They covered their body with leaves and animal skins which provided protection from bad weather. Thus their lifestyle underwent changes little by little.

They became skilful at generating fire by striking two stones or rubbing two sticks together. This discovery led to great changes in their lives. Earlier they used to eat raw meat, but with this, they got used to burn meat and eat it. They improved their life step by step with inventions, experience and creativity, such as preserving meat by using honey etc. and preparing tidier and better clothes.

The man of the Stone Age passed the nomad Age and stepped into the Agricultural Age and then the Industrial Age. In parallel with this progress of the social system, man’s need for houses diversified.

Figure 2.2 - Evolution of human dwellings-from the rock cave to the modern house

Stone Age

Caves

Nomad Age AgriculturalAgePresent

Portable tentspermanent houses made of wood and wattle

Houses built with modern techniques and materials

Figure 2.2

43For Free Distribution.

Thus, the society becomes more complex, man began to have other needs in addition to his basic needs. These other needs can be physical needs such as houses, clothes, tools, vehicles etc. as well as mental and social needs like protection, love, education and recreational activities such as entertainment and sport.

Needs and desires

For a healthy life we must fulfill our basic and other needs. In addition, we also have desires. Desires are things that are not essential for life, but what we like to have. Some desires related to things that are really not necessary for us, or it may relate to unnecessary additional option of a necessary item. It may be produced in such an attractive way with components added to it which are not really required. Our desires are unlimited. We always desire to change what we have. But we should endeavour to control our desires and spend a better life.

E.g. the following are two advertisements displayed at two book shops.

Both erasers do the same function. Which eraser do you prefer? If you buy the perfumed one, you will be spending extra money unnecessarily. Now, do you understand that you will waste money if you are attracted towards such features. It is useful to have the talent to identify what gives best value for money.

However, one person’s desire can be another’s need.

A perfumed eraser of rainbow colours – Rs 20/=

A big eraser to erase easily and fast – Rs. 10/=

Figure 2.4

44For Free Distribution.

E.g. imagine you loved a winter coat that you saw in a TV advertisement. It is just a desire for you. But it is an essential item for someone living in a cold country.

So if you can match your desires with your needs, you will be able to spend a better life. Also, craving for certain desires can be harmful to you.

E.g. if you eat toffees and chocolates often as you have a desire for them, you can develop cavities in your teeth. It might also make you a victim of diseases such as diabetes.

Factors to be concerned in fulfilling needs and desires

We like to fulfill both our needs and desires. While the fulfillment of needs should be given priority, our desires too can be fulfilled if the required resources are available. But since the desires are unlimited, you must make sure that fulfilling them does no harm to you as well as others.

1. Suitability to your health- you should select the types and amounts of food to suit your health.

2. Ability to cope with the economic status of one’s family- Fulfilment of your needs and desires should not be a burden to the family’s economy. - You must prioritize your needs and fulfill them accordingly. - You should not trouble your parents often to fulfill your desires. Figure 2.5

45For Free Distribution.

3. Not harming or offending others

- Imagine you like loud music. But if your family members or neighbors do not like that, it can be a nuisance to them and damage your relationship with them.

4. In accordance with the law, social norms and moral values of the country.

- if you do something illegal such as stealing, when you do not have money to accomplish a desire, that is clearly wrong.

5. Taking wise decisions in fulfilling your needs.

- Everything shown in the media is not essential. They may be mere desires. Goods/ services are attractively presented in advertisements and promotions in order to increase their sales. You should have the ability to identify your needs and select them correctly.

- Even if you have strong desires you should only choose what is essential-even if you have the financial capacity.

Figure 2.7

Figure 2.6

46For Free Distribution.

6. Using available resources wisely without wasting them

- As mentioned earlier, clean water is a limited resource. Therefore, it should not be wasted. You should make it a habit to close the taps after using. Thereby we can contribute to preserve water.

Let us put it into practice

Prepare a list of items bought to your home during the past week /month and categorize them as to whether they are items needed or desired. Accordingly, find out how much has been spent on desires during this period.

Goods Price Need Desire

Figure 2.8

Figure 2.9

47For Free Distribution.

Now we know....

The basic human needs are air, water and food. In life, we have to fulfill the basic needs as well as other needs such as housing, clothes, protection, love, education, rest etc. In addition to them, we have desires too.

In order to lead a healthy life, we should be talented in controlling needs and desires from childhood itself. Nevertheless, in satisfying them, we should be concerned of our health, economic status, others’ rights, social norms, moral values and the law. And also we must make wise decisions, minimise wasting, when satisfying our needs and desires.

Let us test our knowledge

1. Name the basic needs of humans.

2. Mention three other needs in addition to their basic needs.

3. Mention the factors that you should consider when fulfilling your needs and desires.

48For Free Distribution.

Hygiene and correct postures are very important in improving our physical appearance. Therefore, as we have learnt in first lesson, we should take care to maintain our personal hygiene, e.g. cleanliness of nails, teeth, hair, body etc. Also we should use correct postures in day-to-day activities thereby we can increase the efficiency and minimize accidents.

In this lesson, you are going to learn about the factors that affect the physical appearance and correct postures while doing daily activities correctly.

Factors that affect Personal Appearance

One day, the teacher of Health Science told the class that she wanted to appoint a monitor for the subject. Every body in the class suggested that Piumi was the most suitable. So the teacher asked Piumi to come forward. Piumi was seated straight, leaning on the back of her chair, with both feet steady on the ground and hands on her desk. She stood up moving her chair back without making a noise and walked directly to the front of the class with a smiling face. She stood straight in front of the class and everybody could see her cleanliness and the neatness of her dress. First she thanked everyone. At that moment every body

3Let us improve personality through posture

49For Free Distribution.

could see her healthy white teeth. She had also combed and tied her hair neatly in a knot. Her nails were well-trimmed. She had an appropriate weight for her height. She always wore a smile on her face and it was obvious that she was concerned with her physical appearance.

‘‘Piumi is watchful of everything. She helps us a lot and advises us too.”‘‘It was Piumi who taught us how to carry the chairs correctly. ”‘‘Yes, she knows how to do them correctly. So she never falls sick and comes to school every day. ”

‘‘Teacher, therefore Piumi scores good marks in every subject.”

Piumi’s distinctive characteristics were:

• Cleanliness

• Proper maintenance of teeth, nails and hair

• Cleanliness and neatness of books and the dress

• Well-built

• Smiling face and being happy

• Following correct postures

• Good health.

Figure 3.1

50For Free Distribution.

Correct postures for physical appearance

Correct posture always adds to the appearance.

Correct postures are the correct way we keep our body during a certain situation or activitiy. That means how we coordinate our head, body and limbs in day-to-day activities. In postures, the spine plays a very important and major role. It is important to maintain the balance when the spine bears weight.

Situations where we should maintain correct postures

1. Standing 2. Walking3. Sitting4. Lying

1. Correct Standing

• The head and the spine should be straight. • Ear, shoulders, elbow, hip and ankle are in a vertical straight line.

• Two feet are kept apart a little and both feet should bear weight equally.

There are several postures which we adopt in standing.

i) Stand at attentionii) Stand at easeiii) Stand easeFigure 3.2 - Correct standing

51For Free Distribution.

i) Stand at attention

• Head, back and knees are straight, looking forward at the eye level.• Shoulders are parallel to the ground.• Hands are kept on either side of the body with fists clenched• The feet are kept in a “V” shape and heals touching each other. We should stand at attention when we sing the national anthem or the school song or when the national flag is hoisted.

Front view Side view Figure 3.3 - Stand at attention

52For Free Distribution.

ii) Stand at ease

• The head and the back are straight, looking forward at the eye level. • Shoulders are parallel to the ground.

• The hands are kept at the back of the body with the right palm on the left and the fingers crossed-on each other.

• The hands are pushed downwards as no space is visible between the elbows and the body. • Feet are kept apart and both feet bear weight equally (the gap between the two feet is approximately, equal to his or her shoulder breadth).

Front view Back view Figure 3.4 - Stand at ease

We normally, stand at ease in an assembly etc.

53For Free Distribution.

iii) Stand ease

• The body is in a loose comfortable posture.• Hands are kept on either side of the body. The hands are folded a little at the elbows and kept at the waist line.• The body and limbs are relaxed.

This posture is taken when we have to stay long as in an assembly or a lecture.

Front view Back view Figure 3.5 - Stand ease.

54For Free Distribution.

2. Correct walk

• The heel has to touch the ground first. Next the ball touches the ground and finally the toe.

• The head and the body are straight and balanced, but relaxed.• The toes are directed forward in the direction we walk.

Front view Back view Figure 3.6 - Correct walk.

Figure 3.7

Ball

Heel

Toe

55For Free Distribution.

• Hands are folded a little at the elbows, and moved forward and backward rhythmically with the left arm and right leg moving forward, and the right arm and left leg moving backward. • One sole always touches the ground.• The gap between each step is almost equal.

When we walk the correct posture must be maintained as above

3. Correct sitting

Front view Side view Figure 3.8 - Correct sitting posture.

There are different postures for sitting. Let us first consider about sitting on a chair.

56For Free Distribution.

• The head, shoulders and hips are in a vertical straight line.• The body is straight and leaning against the back of the chair.• The neck and the back are straight.• Hands are on thighs and if it is an arm chair, hands are kept on the arms. At school, both elbows are kept on the desk.• Hips, knees and ankles are bent at 90o at the joints .• Both feet are kept steady on the ground.

It is very important to use a chair suitable for the age in order to maintain this posture accurately.

When ever we sit, the correct posture must be maintained as above.

Maintain correct posture in day-to-day activities

We engage in various activities in our day-to-day life; lifting and putting down heavy things, pushing, pulling etc. If we do not do these activities maintaining a correct posture, it can harm the spine, other bones and muscles of the body and affect our health.

What should we do when lifting and putting down a heavy object

We should select a weight that suits our capacity. Bend from the knees and lift the object while maintaining the balance of the body. When lifting and putting down, the heavy object should be kept as close to the body as far as possible. Both hands should be used to bear the weight.

57For Free Distribution.

Things we should not do when lifting something heavy

• Lifting the object keeping the knees straight.• Bending the body from the waist.• Using only one hand.

What should we do when pushing and pulling objects?

The legs should be kept in a way that it will help to balance the body. Both hands should be used. The object should be of movable weight.

Figure 3.9 - Carrying heavy objects.

Figure 3.10 - Pushing

58For Free Distribution.

Harmful effects of bad postures

• Muscles, bones and joints can be damaged. • Meet with accidents.• Bad postures in childhood can lead to above mentioned illnesses during early adulthood.• If you continue to adopt bad postures, you might get used to them and find it difficult to correct them.• Productivity and efficiency can decrease as a result.

Instances where bad postures can be seen in day-to-day activities

• When standing on one leg only one leg bears the weight of the body and both legs are not bearing the weight equally.

• Hunching while walking and sitting.

• Wearing high-heeled shoes.

• When walking, keeping the toes directed inwards or outwards, rather than keeping them directed forwards.

• At school, sitting only on a smaller area of the chair (because the other part of the chair is used to keep the bag).

• Rocking the chair while being seated

• Using inappropriate chairs when using the computer (simple chair without wheels is appropriate. If adjustable chairs are used, they should be adjusted properly).

• Carrying a school bag of an unbearable weight (more than 10% of the body weight, and not carrying the bag on both shoulders).

Figure 3.11

Figure 3.12

59For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

Healthy school bag

Select Correctly

• A bag pack that is healthy, with shoulder straps is most suitable for carrying heavy weights but causes minimal harm to ones body. The height of the back pack or the bottom of the bag should not be below the buttocks of the user. • The shoulder straps that are wide, well padded with adjustable buckles should be used. It will then cause minimum harm to the blood vessels and nerves on the neck and will fit the body tight.

• A waist band should be present and it would help to keep the bag tight and also help the hip to bear additional weight.

• There should be many compartments so that the weight could be distributed equally.

wearing the back pack correctly

• The weight of the bag It should be 10% of the childs weight. The weight should not exceed 15%.

• pack the back pack correctlyThe heavier books should be closer to the back of the body and it should be packed in such away that the contents should not move about. The books should be packed according to the time table putting in books and material required for that day only.• wear the back pack properly Hang the bag on both shoulders. Tighten the straps so that the bag fits on the back tight. Fix the buckle of the waist band and tighten it properly. Don't allow the bag to hang loosely.





Right WrongFigure 3.13 - Wearing a back pack.

60For Free Distribution.

The bottom of the bag chould not be more than four inches below the waist level.

Let us put it into practice

1. Give examples for various wrong postures of the following. Illustrate some of them.• standing• walking• sitting

2. Using the following criteria evaluate whether your school bag is healthwise suitable. criteriaRightWrong1. Height of bag 2. Several compartments3. Width of shoulder straps4. Are shoulder straps padded5. Buckles of the shoulder straps6. Is there a waist strap

Now we know....

Personal hygiene and correct postures increase our physical appearance.

It is very important to follow correct postures when standing, walking, sitting and lying.We must follow correct postures in day-to-day activities such as lifting and lowering heavy objects and pushing and pulling objects.

Bad postures can cause accidents, damages and disabilities. Correct postures help to lead an efficient, healthy life.

61For Free Distribution.

Let us test our knowledge

If the statement from 1-5 are correct, mark as (...√...) and if it is wrong mark as (..x...)

1. Cleanliness increases anyone’s physical appearance. (.......)

2. High-heeled shoes help to walk correctly. (.......)

3. Correct postures influence the physical appearance and health. (.......)

4. Correct postures help to engage in activities without much effort. (.......)

5. When lifting objects, you should always keep your body straight and lift with one hand. (.......)

Answer the questions from 6-8

6. Mention, two situations where the posture of stand at attention is followed.

7. Mention two facts to be concerned about when lifting a heavy object correctly.

8. Mention three harmful effects of bad posture.

Activities such as running, jumping, throwing, creeping, hanging, etc. are movements which help to maintain the body in an active, healthy, energetic and happy state.

Games can be categorized into three main groups such as; minor games, leadup games and organized games.

When you have studied this lesson, you would be able to create and play new games and spend your leisure time happily and enjoyably. Also you would be able to gain some knowledge about organized games.

Let us understand the need for sports activities

The bell rang for the school interval. Menuka and his friends ran happily to the ground after enjoying their meal of chickpeas and cowpea brought in their lunch boxes from home.

“What are we playing today?” asked Raman. “Let’s play Breaking seven stones” answered Mohamed.“We don’t have a ball to play Breaking seven stones. So let’s play chase

Let us enjoy our leisure through recreational games

4

62For Free Distribution.

and catch.” suggested Menuka.“Fine, let’s count to find the catcher. 10, 20, 30, 40……,” counted Ravi keeping his friends in a circle.

Menuka and his friends played till the interval was over.

Can you remember such games that you play when you get together with your friends? You would have seen such games being played during the interval or at the sports meet. All these games help to keep our body active and in good shape. Relaxation for your mind after being engrossed in educational activities could be achieved by indulging in a game or sport.

Figure 4.1- Students engaging in different recreational games.

63For Free Distribution.

The benefits you gain by indulging in sports activities.

Table 4.1PhysicalSocio-mental• Muscles and bones become stronger.• Ability to gain fun and happiness.• Fast and deep breathing help to increase the efficiency of the respiratory system.

• Ability to gain mental fitness.

• The blood circulation rate increases throughout the body.• Learn to obey rules and regulations.

• Waste produced in the body is removed with sweat.• Ability to accept victory or defeat in the same spirit.

• Burn the excess fat in the body.• Ability to work together in unity in a group.

• Ability to get good looks and personality for the body.• Ability to develop patience.

• Decrease the risk of meeting with accidents and getting injured. • Learning to help each other.

• Ability to indulge in activities without being tired easily.• Ability to identify good qualities and morals.

Indulging in recreational games improves physical health, mental health and social well-being.

Minor games

Games you do during your leisure time for enjoyment and happiness by yourself or with friends are known as minor games. Adjusting the rules and regulations according to your wish is a special feature in minor games.

Features of minor games • Ability to play with or without equipment.• Ability to organize the game to suit the available space.• Ability to make use of the resources easily taken from your environment.• Ability to adjust the rules and regulations.

64For Free Distribution.

Some minor games that can be played by yourself

1. Skipping with a skipping rope.2. Throwing and catching a ball.3. Marking a square of 30cm ×30cm on a wall and throwing the ball to the center of the square from a distance.

Some minor games that can be played in pairs

1. Hopscotch

Prepare the squares as shown in the figure below.

Figure 4.2 - Skipping with a skipping rope.Figure 4.3 - Catching a ball.



both feet







one footone foot

12344566

Figure 4.4 - Hop scotch.

65For Free Distribution.

• Need a dry mango seed or a flat stone for the game.• Throw the stone into square No. 1 from the starting point, without trampling the line.• Then hop on to square No. 1 trampling the flat stone.• Standing single legged bend and pick the stone; hop along the squares at the end jump up and turn back and return in the same order till you are out of the court.• In the same way put the stone to all the squares sequentially and complete the game.• The stone, touching the line while throwing it, trampling the lines while jumping and keeping the free leg down through imbalance are reasons to be disqualified from the game.

2.Who is the king?

Figure 4.5 - Who is the king.

• As shown in Fig 4.5 both players should remain within the circles and try to push the opponent out of the circle.

• The one, who gets pushed out of his/her circle, loses the game. The winner is the king.

66For Free Distribution.

Some minor games which can be played with a few or groups of people

1. Changing trees

• Choose nearby trees or posts one less than the number in the group.

• The remaining one after counting in the group, should stand in between the trees or posts and the rest should hold a tree or a post.

• The ones who are holding the trees should try to cross over and change their trees. When the crossing takes place, the one standing in the middle should try to catch a vacant tree. The one who does not get a tree goes to the middle.

2. Stepping on poison

Figure 4.6 - Changing trees.

Figure 4.7 - Stepping on poison

67For Free Distribution.

• Form a circle by holding hands and keep some sort of mark or a small branch of leaves in the middle, as shown in fig 4.7. It is called lump of poison.

• Start pulling each other by their hands and make them step on the assumed lump of poison.

• One who tramples the poison is the looser.

3. Beat the ball

• As shown in Figure 4.8 divide into two equal groups. Form a circle with one group and a line outside the circle with the other group.• The circle needs a ball and the line needs a 12 inch stick.• Give the ball to the leader of the circle and the stick to the leader of the line.• When a signal is made the leader of the circle starts passing the ball round the circle, while the leader with the stick starts running outside the circle.• The leader with the stick runs and hands over the stick to the next in line and retreats to the end of the line.• When the passing ball reaches the leader, he starts counting as “One”.• In the same manner till all the members in the line finish running, the completed number of ball passing should be counted.• Then the two groups should exchange their roles and start playing again.• The group which completes the most number of rounds with ball passing wins the game.

xxx

x

xx

Direction of running of the Ones in the line

Direction of passing ball

Figure 4.8 - Beat the ball.

68For Free Distribution.

Let us put it into practice

Create three minor games which can be played alone, in pairs and with a few people without any equipment and play these games during leisure time.

Leadup Games

Leadup games are games used to develop the skills of organized games. More details about this will be taught in future grades.

Organized games

Unlike in minor games, organized games are played in accordance with approved rules and regulations.The common features that could be seen in an organized game:

• Playgrounds with approved measurements• Sports equipment prepared according to standards• Determines the number of participants that should be present

Games such as volleyball, netball, football, elle, cricket, basketball, badminton, table tennis are some examples of organized games. Leadup games are helpful to develop the skills of organized games.

Figure 4.9

69For Free Distribution.

Volleyball

Volleyball was started in Holly York city in the United States of America. It was introduced to Sri Lanka by Robert Walter Camac. While volleyball is the national game of Sri Lanka, it is also one of the main games played in Sri Lankan schools. Males and females all over the world play volleyball.

Facilities necessary to conduct the game

An 18m long, 9m wide rectangular court, dividing the court into two halves by a net, which is 1m in width, tied on to two poles with upper level at about 2.5m in height from the ground.

How to play the game

Each team consists of six players and they stand in the court, on either side of the net. The players could hit the ball using any part of the body in order to send the ball over the net to the opposing team. Any mistake done by the team helps the opposing team to gain a point with the service.

Figure 4.10 - Children playing volleyball.

Figure 4.11 - volleyball.

70For Free Distribution.

Training the foot work in volleyball

When playing volleyball, the ball coming from the opposing team does not come near you. Therefore, let us identify leg movement activities in order to hit the opposing ball from different places in the court.

• Running forwards, backwards, left and right.• Galloping from side to side.• Doing the above activity with more speed.• Galloping forwards, backwards, left and right.• Make the students stand in a single line with 1m gap and the last student gallops between the students in a zigzag manner to the beginning of the line.

Training the ball handling in volleyball

It is necessary to practise handling the volleyball. This can be done by practising alone, in pairs or among a group of students.

Activities that can be done alone

• Throwing the ball up and catching with both hands.• Bouncing the ball and catching when coming up.• Throwing the ball up and catching the ball while running forward.• Twisting the ball around the body.

Activities that can be done in pairs

• Passing the ball between two by standing apart, short distance.• Passing the ball between two above the level of the head.

Figure 4.12 - Catching the ball while running.

Figure 4.13 - Passing the ball in pairs.

71For Free Distribution.

• Standing back to back, with legs apart, receiving the ball above the head and passing it between the legs.• One person passing the ball in different directions for the other to catch.

Activities to be done in a group

• Forming a single line and passing the ball to the back over the head. Again passing the ball from the back to the front over the head.• Form two lines facing each other. The person in the front rolls the ball with his/her fingers along the ground and hands it over to the person in the front of the opposite row. The one who took the ball should go and sit at the back of the line.

Netball

Figure 4.15 - Children playing net ball

Netball was originated in America. Netball was introduced to Sri Lanka by Mrs. Jenny Green. Though this is a popular game among women,

Figure 4.14 - Passing the ball above the head

72For Free Distribution.

men also indulge themselves in this game. It is also one of the main games in Sri Lankan schools.

Facilities needed to conduct the game

• A 30.5m long x 15.25m wide rectangular court.• Two 3.05m high goal posts.

Figure 4.16 - Goal post Figure 4.17 - Net ball

How to play the game

Two teams each consisting of 7 members play the game. Players engage in the game by passing the ball. A point can be scored by shooting the ball through the ring in the goal post.

Let us train the foot work for netball

Movements are important in netball to pass the ball all over the court.

73For Free Distribution.

Activities to develop this skill

• Walking freely.• Running on the spot.• Running forwards, sideways and backwards.• Running sideways to the left and right.• Running changing the directions.

Let us train the ball handling in netball

Activities to train the correct way of handling the ball could be done alone, in pairs or in groups.

Activities that can be done alone

• Passing the ball from hand to hand.• Throwing the ball up and catching it.• Bouncing the ball and catching it.

Activities that can be done in pairs

• Passing the ball between two by standing within a short distance.• In pairs standing back to back and twisting the ball around the waist and passing.• Bounce the ball between the two and catching it.

Figure 4.18 - Throwing the ball up and catching.Figure 4.19 - Bouncing the ball and catching.

74For Free Distribution.

Activities to be done as a group

• Forming a single line as a group with equal distance and passing the ball to the back over the head.• Form a circle with equal distance facing each other and passing the ball sideways.

Football

Figure 4.21 - A group of students playing football.

Football was improved by the Chinese. But it was the British who helped to popularize it throughout the world. It was introduced to Sri Lanka in 1911.

Figure 4.20 - Bouncing the ball in pairs.

75For Free Distribution.

This game is known as football because the foot is mostly used to hit the ball. Football is the most popular game in the world. Men as well as women engage in this game. This is also one of the main games in Sri Lankan schools.

Facilities needed to conduct the game

• A rectangular play ground, which is 90m in length and 45m in width.• Two goal posts at either end of the ground.

Figure 4.22 - Goal post. Figure 4.23 - Foot ball.How to play the game

It is played between two teams each consisting of 11 members. Players engage in the game by exchanging the ball with their feet and a goal is scored by kicking the ball through the opposing goal post.

Training the foot work in football

It is important to train one's feet to take the ball into the opposing goal by avoiding the opponents.

Activities to develop these skills are:

• Running forward by increasing and decreasing the speed.• Running while changing the directions.

76For Free Distribution.

• Running sideways to the left and right.• While running, jumping up for a signal and continue running.• As shown below in fig. 4.24 arrange a row of cones with a gap of about 1m and run in between in a zigzag manner or sideways or forwards.

Practising leg movements to handle the ball

Activities to develop the skill of handling (kicking) the ball

• By keeping the ball down and kicking it slowly with the front foot, outer foot, inner foot and heel.• Kicking the ball slowly and taking it forward.• Arrange a row of cones with a gap of equal distance and kick the ball slowly in between, controlling the ball to take it forward.• Passing the ball by hitting it with different angles of the foot and stopping it with the foot.

Let us put it into practice Create a minor game, using three activities that you done to train ball handling of volleyball, netball and football.

Figure 4.24

77For Free Distribution.

Now we know....Sports activities could be used in order to enhance exercises for your body and gain happiness and enjoyment.

Minor games have lenient rules and regulations.

You can create minor games either to play alone, in pairs or in groups to enjoy your leisure.

There are accepted rules and regulations for organized games. Volleyball, netball and football are played in schools as the main organized sports. You can develop your talents by practising these games.

Let us test our knowledge

1. What are the benefits you gain by playing with your friends?

2. Mention the special features in the minor games that you have created for your enjoyment.

3. Name four organized games.

4. Mention three features of organized games.

78For Free Distribution.

Let us see whether you could remember the activities done in the earlier classes like walking, running, jumping and throwing. You would have participated in the activities of the school sports meet by developing these skills in different ways.these activities are developed not only for sports competitions, but also for daily activities as well. By improving them we will be able to lead a healthy life. Through this we can be more efficient in our daily activities.

In this lesson you will learn the proper techniques of walking, running, jumping, throwing, and how they are used in your daily activities. We can develop our talents with proper practice. Practise and experience all the activities given in this lesson, in the playground.

Walking

Every healthy person indulges in walking. Furthermore, this is done as an exercise and as a competitive event in athletics. But there may be differences among people when walking. Let us check the differences in walking among friends in the classroom.

Let us develop basic athletic skills5

79For Free Distribution.

Select a classroom or any cemented floor. Draw a few straight lines with a piece of chalk. Two children get together and one should wet the legs (without shoes) and walk on either side of the line so that the footprint is visible. The other should examine the foot prints. The rest of the children should walk in the same manner.

Figure 5.2 - Foot prints of correct walking.

When the above foot prints are examined, there can be differences. If the walking was done correctly it should be like the above diagram.

Try to bring back to your memory on the aspects of correct walking which you learnt in your third lesson.

Figure 5.1 - Walking.

80For Free Distribution.

The benefits of correct walking

- Able to live an active life. - Helps to raise the health condition as it is an exercise. - Develops a good personality. - Able to reduce physical injuries and defects when engaging in daily activities or sports.

Activities to practice walking Leader

Figure 5.3

1. Select a leader from the class. Get into groups of 8. Each group stands by the side of the starting line. When the leader gives a signal one child from each group walks about 10m forward, comes back and stands at the back of the group. Next another child walks. In the same manner all students should take part in this activity ^Figure 5.3&.

2. The group holds hands and walks about 10m forward. Comes back to the starting point. Do this activity several times.

3. Divide the class into 2 groups. The groups form into two lines. Students in one line walk one behind the other along the path as shown in the figure 5.4 and join the line again. Then the next line also walk in the same manner, and join their line. When one line walks, the children in the other line should observe them. Both lines should do the activity at the same time. Increase the speed of the activity and repeat.

starting line

81For Free Distribution.

4) Divide the class into 4 groups. Stand in a line one behind the other. Draw two parallel lines 2m apart and place a few marks as shown in figure 5.5. One child at a time walks and comes back to the line in a zigzag manner and taps on the first child’s shoulder. Then walks to the back of the line. The next child in the line follows the same routine. Repeat this activity for everyone.

Running We run for different purposes in our day to day life. What happens with running is that the real distance is reached within a short time. There are many running events in athletics. Running is important for different types of games. Running is a good exercise for the body.

Marks placed on the play ground Children’s direction of walking

Figure 5.4

StudentsSignsFigure 5.5

2m

Figure 5.6 - Running.

82For Free Distribution.

When running, the hands and feet move in a rhythmic pattern. While the right leg moves with the left arm, the left leg with the right arm move in the same direction. While exchanging the feet and running forward, hands swing forwards and backwards. The upper arm is bent at the elbow at an angle of about 90 degrees. Engaging in running exercises helps to increase the speed.

The main difference between walking and running is that, during running both feet will be above the ground at a certain moment of time. There is an instance where, both feet will be in the air at the same time.

Activities to practise running Appoint a leader for this activities.

1. Form lines consisting of 8 or 10 students. Mark the starting line and within a distance of 30m mark the finishing line. The first row of students come to the starting line. They start running slowly at the leader’s command. They run up to the finishing line. Then come back walking and stand at the back of the line. Now the second row runs. All indulge in this activity in the same manner. Then within the same boundary run forward raising your knee. As earlier, go to the back of the line. All should practise this activity. Then run with your feet touching your back. All should do this activity as said above (Figure 5.7).

Figure 5.7

Finishing line

Starting lineLeader

83For Free Distribution.

2. Do this with the help of the other activities you have already learnt. Draw lines as shown below in the playground with a gap of about 10m. Form lines as above. When the leader signals, start running from the starting line to the AA line. Then walk till the BB line. Again run, walk and go to the back of the line. Each student should engage in this activity at least 3 times ^figure 5.8&.

Let us put it into practice

List the similarities and differences between running and walking.

Jumping When we do our daily chores we need to jump at different instances.

Jumping is done in different directions. That is, the ability to jump forwards, upwards, sideways, backwards, etc. When jumping, the flight can be done single legged or with both legs. Landing on the ground also can be done single legged or with both legs. Here the following details should be considered. Details to be considered when landing- Fold the knees when bringing the body down - Landing on the soles- Safeguarding the balance

Figure 5.8

A

ABCD

DCB

RunningRunningWalkingWalking

Starting line

10 m

Leader

84For Free Distribution.

It should be noted that the landing should not be done with legs straight.

These different kinds of jumps are used in sports and day-to-day activities. High jump and long jump are seen mostly as sports.

Activities to practise jumping

1. Mark three lines with a two feet gap in between. Children should stand one behind the other in four lines. Make them stand one at a time and jump over these lines and come back to their line. Repeat

Figure 5.9 - Jumping.

85For Free Distribution.

this activity several times. Do the above activity with one leg. Adjust the distance to suit the length of their jumps. (figure 5.10)

2. Draw a line in the playground. Then jump across the line in a zigzag manner with a single foot and then with both feet. Indulge in activities consisting of the jumping skills you learnt above.

Figure 5.113. Select three children with three different levels of height (short, medium height and tall). Ask each child to stand against a wall outside the class and tell them to raise one hand. Put a mark at the level of the tip of the finger. Ask each student to come in a line, jump up with both legs and touch the wall and observe the level each one could achieve. Give every child another attempt to jump and improve on the first mark.

4. Divide class into two teams as A and B. Group A forms a circle. Group B stays inside the circle. Number the students in circle (A) (1-15). When the child in the circle calls out a number, the child bearing the respective number hops in and chases the students in circle trying to catch them. Anyone caught in that manner or going out of the circle is disqualified and they have to stand outside the circle. The ones who hop are disqualified when they keep their leg down or change it. Then the ones in the centre, call out another number. When one

A

ABC

CBStarting line

Figure 5.10

86For Free Distribution.

whole team gets disqualified the two teams exchange their roles. This can be done as a competition. This game can be done within a specific time limit or till everyone is disqualified.

5. Indulge in the hopscotch game learnt in Lesson four.

Throwing

Throwing is involved in games and athletics and it is done by everybody from infancy. People who lived in ancient times hunted animals for food by throwing objects to kill the animal. Thus, man has used the throwing function for a very long period of time.In athletics rules and regulations have been implemented for these throws in a methodical way. Different types of throws can be seen, such as, throws in front of the body, sideways of the body, above the head and above the shoulders.

Points to be considered when throwing

• The technique of throwing depends on the equipment used.• Maintain the balance of the body after the throw.• Consider your safety as well as the safety of others when throwing.

Figure 5.12 - Throw.

87For Free Distribution.

Activities to practise throwing

1. Get a few soft cricket balls and throw it forward, single handed, overhead, as far as possible.

2. About ten children stand in two lines at a suitable space. As shown in the diagram below, throw tennikoit rings from one person to the other. If necessary increase the distance between the two lines and restart throwing. Small bicycle tyres could be substituted for tennikoit rings. Everyone in the class should take part in this activity.

Figure 5.13

3. Mark a spot. Place four tins, one on top of the other about 1m ahead from the spot. Keep a child on a marked spot with a tennis or rubber ball in hand. Ask the child to break the four tins by throwing the ball. Marks can be given to the child according to the number of throws. Do this activity by changing the distance.

88For Free Distribution.

Now we know.... Engaging in walking, running and jumping in the correct manner paves the way to lead an efficient life with minimum accidents and injuries and improve the skills for athletic.

When walking using the correct technique firstly the heel touches the ground and finally the toes. During running, at a given moment of time both legs would be above the ground. But during walking one foot should always be touching the ground.

Different types of jumps could be seen in our day to day life. Safety should be considered when landing after a jump.

There are different types of throws such as overhead, sideways, forwards, etc.,You should consider your safety as well as the safety of others when throwing.

Let us test our knowledge

1. When walking correctly, which part of the foot should touch the ground first?

2. Mention a feature which can be seen in running, but cannot be seen in walking.

3. What are the jumps you see in athletic events?

4. Mention points needed to be considered when throwing

89For Free Distribution.

90For Free Distribution.

Think of the minor games you play with your friends in your free time. Can you remember the rules of those games? For example, in ''Gas maru kireema'' (changing trees) the player who is not able to claim a ‘tree’ has to go to the center; in ''Kawda raja'' (who is the king) the players lose the game if they step over the boundary; in hopscotch, players are disqualified if they step on a line. Can you remember how these rules made it easier for you to enjoy the game without having an issue with other players?

Talented sportsmen and sportswomen became world famous, after their distinctive achievements in international sporting competitions. However, it was later discovered that some had used banned performance enhancing drugs and food supplements to achieve these distinct victories. When this was discovered, they were banned from competition and their medals were rescinded. This is an example which shows us that there are rules and regulations in sports and we must follow them and engage in sports in an ethical manner. After studying this chapter you will underatand the importance of following rules and being polite, in sports as well as in day- to-day life. Also you will get to know, engage in sports will give you the ability to respect each other and cope with different opinions.

Let us respect rules,regulations and ethics in sports

6

91For Free Distribution.

Rules and Regulations in sports

Rules and regulations in sports are the norms that have been imposed for the conduct of the sport and for the safety of sports persons. These rules differ from sport to sport.

Ethics

Virtues and traditions needed to maintain rules and regulations are known as ethics.

Rules, regulations and ethics in sports are helpful to maintain the dignity and honour of the game. If not for rules, regulations and ethics, there would be no discipline when engaging in sports and that would lead to conflicts.

Figure 6.1 - Accepting victory without causing conflicts.

92For Free Distribution.

Figure 6.2 - Accepting defeat without causing conflicts.

Importance of rules, regulations and ethics in sports

When rules, regulations and ethics are observed in sports, the confidence in the game will be increased and everyone will be interested in participating. Such sporting events will be exciting and interesting to the spectators, thus increasing their participation as well.

Table 6.1

Bring real victory

Solveissues

Protect the rights of the players

RULES, REGULATIONS AND ETHICS IN SPORTS

Develop personal qualitiesMaintain the dignity of the game

Participate enthusiastically in sports

Minimise injuries

93For Free Distribution.

Figure 6.3 - Group of excited spectators watching a game.

The main objectives of any sport are participation and enjoyment. Observing rules in sports are important to achieve this objective. Spectators also have to enjoy the game in a decent manner.

When engaging in sports, we have to work together with different types of people. What we learn from such experiences will help us to develop our personal qualities and abilities such as:

• Team work• Ability to listen to and respect the opinions of others• Respect leadership• Patience• Ability to accept victory and defeat gracefully• Endurance• Discipline• Ability to handle stressful situations successfully. Observing these characteristics will help you to have a better future as well.To minimize injuries when doing sports, participants should pay attention to the following facts:

Figure 6.4

94For Free Distribution.

• Observe rules and regulations• The playground should be prepared according to requirements• Standard equipment must be used • Use suitable clothes and shoes• Methods of training should be appropriate to the age• Employ qualified coaches or trainers.• Availability of a person who has trained about giving firstaid

When selecting the participants for a sporting event from a pool, it must be done according to their talents and in a transparent, ethical way, considering the best for the team as a whole. It would make the task of selection more convenient and would prevent disagreements and dissatisfaction.

When you are able to apply the qualities dedication, interest, obedience and politeness you show in sports such as in your day-to-day activities, you will be able to make your life successful.

The following are some of the difficulties we will face if we do not follow rules, regulations and ethics in sports:

• Being disqualified from the game• Facing bans from competitions• Being subject to the scorn and disrespect of others• Losing friends• Becoming a person who is not respected or recognised by the society.Personal advantages of observing rules, regulations and ethics in sports

Learning to observe the rules, regulations and ethics in sports will add a number of virtues to your life. You will be able to build up

Figure - 6.6

Figure - 6.5

95For Free Distribution.

positive relationships in society as a result of such virtues you possess. Observing rules and regulations and respecting ethics in your day-to-day life with members of your family as well as your friends will help you build healthy relationships with them. If we are able to encourage a greater number of friends to engage in sports and also to observe the rules, regulations and ethics in sports, we will be able to inculcate virtues such as obedience and politeness in them. As a result, the future generation will be endowed with virtuous individuals who appreciate moral values.

Let us put it into practice

1. Collect information about persons who have participated in sporting events and violated rules, regulations and ethics in sports in your area or at national or international level.

2. Discuss the rules, regulations and ethics in sports that you learned with members of your family and add any relevant incidents that they may know.

Now we know....

Rules, regulations and ethics in sports have been formed for regulating each sport, for the protection of players, to ensure all are treated with equity and to protect the honour and dignity of sports. Rules and regulations are essential to ensure enjoyment in sports and also to ascertain true victories.

Obedience to the laws and politeness are virtues that can be practiced when engaging in organized games as well as recreational games.

Practicing these virtues in sports will help you become law abiding and polite citizens in society. As a result, the future society will be endowed with virtuous individuals who appreciate value.

Not observing rules, regulations and ethics would cause a number of issues and difficulties.

96For Free Distribution.

Let us test our knowledge

Place a mark in front of correct statements and a  mark in front of incorrect statements.

1. Rules and regulations are important for the protection of ( ) players.

2. Ethics are certain norms imposed by the organizers ( ) of a sport according to requirement.

3. Sporting events held with enthusiasm and interest will ( ) be exciting and interesting to the spectators.

4. Honour and dignity of sports will be protected when ( ) there are no rules, regulations and ethics in sports. 5. Those who violate the rules, regulations and ethics in ( ) sports will have to face punishment.

Give short answers.

1. Mention a few rules, regulations and ethics in sports?

2. State the importance of rules, regulations and ethics in sports?

3. Mention three difficulties that must be faced when rules, regulations and ethics in sports are not observed?

97For Free Distribution.

Food is a basic need of human beings. It gives nutrients to the body. We have got basic knowledge about food and the nutrients it contains in the primary classes.

We cannot live without food. Food is essential to us in order to satisfy our hunger and get the necessary strength and nutrition for our body. We can lead a healthy life by taking healthy meals which contain proper nutrients. A healthy meal means hygienically prepared meal that contains the necessary nutrients in the correct proportions as required by the body. A healthy meal will provide nutrients for three functions of the body. They are: supplying energy, helping the growth of the body and give protection from diseases.

This lesson teaches us the need of a healthy meal and points to consider when taking healthy food and also develop our knowledge regarding nutritional problems.

Why do we need food?

1. To get energy

The energy necessary for the body is mainly obtained from carbohydrates and fats in our food.

7Let us get used to healthy foodhabits

98For Free Distribution.

2. For the growth of the body

Protein in the food helps the body to grow. Apart from this vitamins and minerals are also important for the growth of the body.

3. To be safeguarded from diseases

Vitamins and minerals mainly help us to safeguard ourselves from diseases.

The nutrients necessary for these activities are present in food.

To receive the proper nutrition we should add different types of food to our meals. Food can be categorized under six groups.

1. Grains (cereals) and tubers (yams)2. Vegetables 3. Fruits4. Meat, fish, eggs and pulses5. Milk and milk products6. Food containing oils and sugar

Carbohydrates

Nutrients

Macronutrients

Proteins Lipids (oils and fats)

Micronutrients

Vitamins e.g. A, B, C, D, E, KMineralse.g. iron, calcium, zinc, iodine,

Figure 7.1

99For Free Distribution.

Different categories of food, their main nutrients and their functions are shown below.

Table 7.1Food Group Main nutrientsFunctionRice, bread, yams and grainsCarbohydratesGives energy to the body.

VegetablesVitamins, minerals, carbohydratesSafeguards the body from diseases. Gives energy.FruitsVitamins, mineralsSafeguards the body from diseases.Meat, fish, eggs pulses and cerealsProteins, vitamins, minerals, lipidsNecessary for the Growth of the body. Safeguards the body from diseases.

Milk and dairy productsProtein, vitamins, minerals and lipidsNecessary for the Growth of the body. Safeguards the body from diseases.Food containing oils and sugarFats, carbohydratesGives energy.

Points to consider when choosing healthy food

● Nutritional value ● Variety ● Sufficient quantity ● Natural condition ● Freshness ● Cleanliness ● Food hygiene

Figure 7.2

100For Free Distribution.

1. Nutritional value

Nutritional value of food depends on the quality and the quantity of nutrients present in the food and this could increase or decrease depending on many factors.

2.Variety

Adding different types of food to our meals or the same food prepared in different ways can provide variety and could make nutrients easily available for the body. E.g. ● adding food of different colours and flavours,● taking five portions of fruits and vegetables of different colours daily,● preparing food in different ways (frying fish, ambul thiyal, fish curry)

Figure 7.3

Let us put it into practice

Line up different coloured fruits and vegetables. Find out methods of including these in your diet with their natural colours.

101For Free Distribution.

3. Sufficient quantity

The quantity of food intake differs from person to person depending on their Body Mass Index (BMI), age, sex, activeness and health condition.

Three major meals and two minor meals are sufficient for a day’s intake of nutrients by a person. By taking five types of vegetables or fruits in a day you can obtain different nutrients such as vitamins and minerals.

The food taken from each food group should be proportionate to each other. A simple method to follow in your day to day life is to serve proportionately, by dividing your meal as follows in the food plate.

Food plateThe meal should comprise; • Starchy food (yams, grains) - about 1/2 of the plate• Food with proteins (meat, fish, eggs) - 1/4 of the plate• Vegetables and fruits - 1/4 of the plate

In addition you should take;• Milk or dairy products - 2 portions per day (1 portion =150 ml fresh/ powder milk = 1tub of yogurt/curd = piece of cheese)• Oil and sugar - a little amount should be added.

Figure 7.4 - Food plate.

vegetables and fruits

meat, fish, eggs and food with proteins

bread, rice, yams

milk/ dairy products

14

14

12

102For Free Distribution.

4. Natural condition

Natural food means food with minimal addition or no addition of preservatives, colouring or chemicals. Natural food is high in nutritional value. In addition to natural vitamins they also contain dietary fibre as well. Processed foods are not favourable to the health, e.g. sausages, french fries, artificial drinks.

There are different types of artificial drinks in the market. Drinking them is not healthy. Water is the most suitable natural drink. Water is a medium necessary for most of the body’s activities. During the period of growth it is very important that children drink about 1.5 - 2 litres of water per day.

5. Freshness

Fresh fruits and vegetables contain more vitamins and minerals. As time passes the colour, taste, and smell of the food changes and with that the desire to eat them also declines. Nutrients like vitamins can be destroyed when food gets stale. Therefore as time passes the nutritional value in food also decreases.

6. Cleanliness

It is very important to safeguard the cleanliness of food when manufacturing, storing, transporting, cooking and consuming. Adding of agrochemicals and chemical fertilizers should be minimised when growing plants for food. It is very important to safeguard food from insects such as cockroaches and rats during storage. This is because these animals can spread germs that can cause disease. In transportation food should be packed and safeguarded without germs entering and food getting spoilt. It is essential to wash both hands with soap and water before preparing or consuming meals. Fruits and vegetables should be washed well, before consumption.

103For Free Distribution.

7. Food hygiene

Food hygiene means the use of proper methods when choosing, preparing and serving food in order to avoid sicknesses. This is important for making sure that food is suitable for consumption. Table 7.2 explains how ‘hygienic food’ can be chosen.

Table 7.2Type of foodThings to be considered

Vegetables/ Fruits Choose fresh vegetables or fruits which are readily available during a particular season.FishChoose fresh fish with bright eyes and red or pink gills.MeatChoose bright red or pink coloured meat.

GrainsAvoid taking discoloured, shapeless, damaged, insect infected grains.Packeted and canned food Be alert about the necessary standard, manufacturing date, expiry date and ingredients. Bloated, dented or damaged tins must not be purchased.

Water bottlesCheck for the certificate of the ministry of health. Check for SLS certification and expiry date. See if the lid of the bottle is well sealed.

Figure 7.5

104For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

Food that can be used as a healthy snack

1. A fruit or a fresh fruit drink2. Yoghurt or curd3. Boiled gram or green gram 4. Boiled manioc or sweet potatoes with coconut5. Sago porridge6. ‘’Helapa’’7. Gingelly balls, peanuts or cashew nuts8. Corn

Let us put it into practice

According to races, areas and different functions, food varieties differ. Find out those types of foods and how the nutritional value is preserved in above mentioned varieties.

Methods used during ancient times to increase the quality of food

There are special foods existing from the ancient times. There are many healthy foods prepared through experiences in the past.

1) The use of mixed food to enhance nutritional value. E.g. types of food like hath maluwa, green gram milk rice, mixed green leaf mallum, pongal, sambar, buriyani, etc.

Figure 7.6

105For Free Distribution.

2) We can mix some substances to the food to increase absorption of nutrients. E .g. adding lime juice to green leaf mallum.

3) Using natural fertilizers when cultivating crops. E.g. animal excreta, dry leaves.

4) Using natural methods of pest repellents instead of chemical insecticides. E.g. the juice obtained from margosa seeds mixed with water can be used as an insecticide growing marigolds – the smell of this flower repels insects.

Figure 7.7

106For Free Distribution.

Problems in nutrition

Nutritional problems occur when the necessary nutrients are received either in reduced amounts or increased amounts than the body requires. This is known as malnutrition.

Diagramme 7.1

Undernutrition

Undernutrition conditions such as stunting, wasting or underweight can occur, due to lack of macro nutrients such as carbohydrats, fats and proteins necessary for the body.

• Not having the suitable height for the age is called Stunting.• Not having the suitable weight for the height is called Wasting (Wasting can be determined by the use of Body Mass Index - BMI).

Zinc deficiency

Nutrients

Macronutrients

Micronutrients

UndernutritionStunting

Wasting

Overweight

Obesity

Iron deficiencyIodine deficiencyVitamin A deficiencyCalcium deficiency

Overnutrition

Deficiency

decreasing

decreasing

increasing

107For Free Distribution.

Problems faced due to undernutrition

• Contacts communicable diseases easily• Slowing down of physical growth• Impaired concentration • Impairment of education• Reduction of participation in sports activities.

Overnutrition

If more macro nutrients such as carbohydrates and fats are taken than the body requires over nutritional conditions can occur.

This can take two forms;

• When the weight is higher than required for the height, the result

is overweight

• Excessive weight increase than appropriate for the height is called obesity.

In the first lesson we learnt to identify the nutritional status using BMI and height chart.

Figure 7.9 - Overweight / obese.Figure 7.8- Wasting.

108For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

• Obese individuals are more prone to develop non-communicable diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, heart diseases and strokes.• To prevent being overweight and obese one should engage in exercises, avoid food with flour, oily and sugar containing foods.

Micronutrient deficiency states and steps that can be taken to prevent them

DeficiencyBad influenceMethods to avoid

Iron deficiencyAneamia(Reduced heamoglobin in blood)

Taking foods rich in iron such as meat, fish, dry fish, green leaves (dark green in colour).³ Should add vitamin C rich food like lime to absorb iron to the body.³ Not to drink tea or coffee after about one hour of mealsIodine deficiencyReduction in growth, weakness in memory and education, Develops goitres.

Use of iodine added salt.

³ When storing iodised salt. it should be stored in a dark vessel in a cool place.³ Iodised salt should be added after food is cooked.

Table7.3

109For Free Distribution.

DeficiencyBad influenceMethods to avoid

Vitamin A deficiencyDevelopment of dry skin, unable to withstand sicknesses, night blindness(reduction of vision at night)

Taking foods rich in vitamin A such as yellow/orange and dark green coloured vegetables or fruits (carrots, pumpkins, mango, papaw and green leaves), eggs, milk, cheese, meat, fish.

Calcium deficiencyThe weakness of the bones and teethTaking foods rich in cal-cium such as sprats, small fish, eggs, milk and milk products.Zinc deficiency Reduction in growth, unable to withstand sicknesses

Taking foods rich in zinc such as beans, peanuts, red meat and seafood.

Let us put it into practice

Find and diagrammatically present different methods that can be used to purify water before drinking.

110For Free Distribution.

Now we know.... Food is one of our basic needs. Obtaining energy for the body, growth of the body and protection from diseases are functions of a healthy meal.

While food can be categorized under six main groups, their nutrient composition differs from each other. A healthy meal consists of all of them in correct amounts, will provide the body with all the required nutrients. The required amounts can differ from person to person.

Food provides five nutrients and they are carbohydrates, proteins, fats, lipids, vitamins and minerals. These nutrients are divided in to two groups as macronutrients and micronutrients.

There are certain points you should bear in mind when choosing healthy food, such as nutritional value, variety, sufficient quantity, natural condition, freshness, cleanliness and hygiene of the food.

Nutritional problems can occur when the nutrients in consumed food are either less or more than required. Main nutritional problems are undernutrition, overnutrition and micronutrient deficiency.

Let us test our knowledge

1. Name three main functions of food.

2. What are the six main categories into which food can be divided?

3. Name five nutrients we get from food?

4. What are the factors that will decide the intake of food of a person?

5. What is the illness that occurs when macro nutrients are taken in excess?

6. What are the symptoms of iron deficiency?

7. What food will prevent blindness caused by vitamin A deficiency?

111For Free Distribution.

Let us maintain a healthy body

8

Our body is wonderful. Its functions helpus to maintain our life. The body is made ofseveral systems and each system has a specialfunction to perform to maintain the body. Allthese systems function in harmony to sustainlife.

Eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin are the sensory organs that help us to connect to the environment around us. Therefore, we must protect these organs to ensure their optimum function. This section will educate you on how to do it.

There is life in all of us

Place your hand on the left side of your chest and see if you can feel the heartbeat. Feel your pulse by placing your left fingers below the wrist of your right hand. Check your heart rate after running around the school grounds. Place a finger below your nostrils and see whether you are breathing faster than usual. Note whether it is faster than at the times you are resting. Observe the changes that take place in your body as you inhale and exhale.

112For Free Distribution.

Try to lift several objects of different weights and observe the difference when trying to lift each of them. Why is it not possible to lift a table, although it is possible to lift a few books without much difficulty? What is the part of the body that strains most when you are trying to lift a heavy object?

Above activities show that different organs and systems are working in our body and they help the body to sustain life.E.g. Digestive system helps us digest food and beverages we consume. Urinary system eliminates waste from the body.

Functions of the body

Why do we feel thirsty when we are playing?Think of the times that you got a cut or an abrasion on your body? What happened to it after a few days?Why do you think some illnesses such as the common cold are cured even if we do not take any medicine?

All the systems in our body help to maintain the body and sustain life. The systems make sure that internal functions of the body are performed properly. In other words, the systems coordinate with each other to sustain life.

E.g. • Glucose in our blood provides energy to the body. When the blood glucose level is low, It is indicated to us by feeling hungry. The food we eat is converted into glucose in the digestive system.• The body temperature increases when we play. The body brings down the temperature by sweating. The body cools down when the sweat on the skin evaporates. The water inside the body will be reduced and we perceive it as thirst. That makes us drink water to replenish it.

113For Free Distribution.

• The body has the ability to heal cuts and wounds. • The immune system in the body can fight bacteria and virus that cause illnesses. It has the ability to cure illnesses and also to prevent.

What happens when we engage in our day-to-day activities? How do activities such as walking, running, jumping and throwing occur? Discuss the ways we get energy to engage in these activities. Think how your hands and legs work when you walk, run and jump.

You have learnt the proper techniqnes of walking, running, jumping and throwing in lesson five.

Bones, muscles and joints help the body to move. Bones in the body are connected by joints. Joints allow the limbs to be flexible. Muscles in the body provide the power needed to make the movements. The energy needed to do all these activities is provided by the food we eat.

Sensory organs

Eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin are the sensory organs that help us to obtain information and connect to the environment around us.

Eye

We see when, light in the environment goes through the eye to create a reflection.

Figure 8.1 - External appearance of eye.

114For Free Distribution.

Maintaining healthy eyes

Our eyes are a very important sensory organ. We must make sure they are well protected.

• Our eyes can get tired when we read, use the computer or watch television for a long period of time without a break. When doing such activities, we must allow our eyes to rest. This can be done by taking a break once every 10 minutes to look at a distant object. It helps the eyes to relax.

• When watching television, at least a distance of about 2 1/2 times of the screen size should be maintained between you and the television screen.

• A green colour background such as a plain of grass is the best to have when you read. Such a background will reduce tiredness of the eyes.

• Reading must be done in a place where there is plenty of light.

• Eating food that are good sources of Vitamin A (e.g. green leaves, animal protein) frequently helps to make your eyes healthier.

• Eyes are very sensitive organs. Therefore, you must not apply medicine or any other ointment into the eyes without obtaining medical advice. Cleaning the eye with clean water can help you to remove any dust that has gone into it.

• Eyes can be harmed easily when working in factories, doing carpentry work and using lawn mowers and other equipment. It is compulsory to wear goggles when engaging in such activities.

• It is best to use a pair of good quality sunglasses to protect eyes from direct sunlight.

115For Free Distribution.

Figure 8.2 Standard reading board

Let us Learn More

Checking eyesight

Weaknesses in eyesight can be identified through an eyesight check. This check includes reading the standard reading board from a distance of 20 feet (6m)and then reading the board with one eye closed. The same test can be repeated with the other eye closed and read all the letters up to the last line.

Let us put it into practice

Calculate the distance that must be maintained between the viewers and the television set according to screen size of the television and present the information in a table.

Ear

The ear can be divided into three parts as the outer ear, the middle ear and the inner ear. Sound goes through the external auditary canal to the inner ear via the middle ear. Then you can hear.

Figure 8.3 - External appearance of ear.

116For Free Distribution.

Maintaining healthy ears

• You should not pour any liquids into the ear without medical advice. • You can pour a small amount of oil (pure coconut oil) or even clean water (if you cannot find oil) into the ear if an insect has crawled inside. Immediately afterwards take the person to a hospital.

• Objects such as cotton buds and safety pins should not be put into the ear to clean it.

• Listening to very loud music or other sounds too often can cause harm to the ears.

• Wearing headphones and using hand phones frequently can also harm the ear.

Let us Learn More

Identifying hearing weaknesses

Stand behind a person at a distance of about one meter.Make sounds of different levels of intensity and observe the response by the individual to each of them.

Nose

The cells inside our nose help us to feel different smells. When cells in the nose feel these smells in the environment, messages are generated and they are taken to the brain through the cells in our nose.

When an object gets stuck inside the nose, something like a coconut fibre can be used to tickle the nose and cause sneezing. Sneezing will dislodge the object and make it come out. If it does not work, you must not insert anything into the nose to take the object out, but take the patient to a hospital without delay.

117For Free Distribution.

Tongue

The tongue is used for talking, mixing food inside the mouth and for tasting. Our tongue is able to recognise four main types of tastes.

Sweetness – sugarSourness – limeBitterness – bitter gourdSaltiness – salt Different parts of the tongue are better able to taste each of these tastes.

Clean your tongue properly while you brush your teeth.

Let us put it into practice

Prepare a table of different food types that will give different tastes.

Skin

Our skin performs a number of functions:

• Protection• Giving shape and appearance to the body• Controlling body temperature• Producing vitamin D• Discharging waste from the body through sweat.

Sweet taste

Sour taste

Bitter taste

Salty taste

Figure 8.4 - Areas that feel taste.

118For Free Distribution.

Maintaining healthy skin

• Skin must not be exposed to extreme sunlight. • You must refrain from using different kinds of creams and ointments on the skin as well as washing the skin too often using soap. • It is important to keep the skin clean by washing twice a day.

Otherthan above sensory organs, nails, hair and teeth are also important features in our body

Nails and Hair

Nails and hair protect the body.

• Nails must be clipped and maintained properly. Dirty nails can cause illnesses.

• Hair must be maintained, clean and free of lice. It is important to wash your hair at least once every two days.

Teeth

Figure 8.5 - Arrangement of teeth.

Teeth inside the mouth help us chew the food we eat. Teeth begin to appear when children are around six to nine months of age and are completed by about three years of age. First set of teeth that appear are known as milk teeth and there are 20 such teeth. Milk teeth fall off

Inscisors Canines

šš

PremolarsMolars

119For Free Distribution.

between the ages of six years and 12 years to make way for permanent teeth. There are 32 permanent teeth in the mouth. They are divided into four types.

Teeth can decay due to the following reasons:

• Not cleaning the teeth properly• Eating sticky and sweet food too often• Taking very hot or very cold food/ drinks often• Cleaning teeth using sharp objects• Biting on very hard objects such as bottle caps and pen clips• Using sand, coal and other rough material to clean teeth.

The following good habits will help to keep our teeth healthy:

• Brushing teeth after meals - all five sides of the tooth must be cleaned properly (Figure 8.6)

Figure 8.6 - Brushing teeth correctly.

• Using dental floss regularly to clean teeth• Rinsing the mouth after eating sweets• Using a suitable brush to clean teeth - avoiding the use of old brushes with bent or broken bristles• Avoiding the use of sharp objects to clean teeth• Eating food that has more calcium• Getting your teeth checked by a dentist at least once every six months• Getting your broken teeth filled without delay• Obtaining medical advice if a tooth is broken by accident. - It is now possible to fix teeth that are broken in accidents. Take the tooth that broke off and see a dentist immediately.

The inside of teeth to be brushed up and down

Teeth in the upper jaw to be brushed down wards

Teeth in the lower jaw to be brushed upwardsMolars to be brushed forwards and backwards

120For Free Distribution.

Maintaining a healthy body and protecting it

We must follow good health habits to be healthy.

1. Healthy food

Having a healthy balanced diet is important to keep the body healthy.

2. Clean water

You need to drink about 1.5 - 2 liters of water per day. You must not forget to drink a sufficient amount of water on very hot days and at times you engage in sports. Water is the best drink to quench your thirst.

3. Sleep and rest

Sleep allows your body to rest. You need to have about 8-10 hours of sleep per day. Lack of sleep can cause tiredness, weak memory power and irritation.

4. Exercise

Out door activities, helping parents with household chores, walking, riding the bicycle and engaging in sports that can provide exercise to the body requires. Growing children must engage in such physical activities for at least an hour a day.

Keeping our bodies healthy through such good practices will prevent illness and other issues that cause problems for us. In that way, we will be able to spend our days happily and productively while enhancing our talents.

121For Free Distribution.

Let us put it into practice

1. Prepare a timetable that shows a daily routine which promotes physical, mental and social development.

2. Discuss how you can use the talents you already have, to spend a productive and joyful life.

Now we know....All the systems in our body are useful to sustain our life. The systems make sure functions of the body are maintained in a proper order.

Eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin are the sensory organs that receive messages from the environment.

We must follow good health habits to maintain a fit and healthy body. Healthy meals, personal hygiene, sufficient sleep, rest, exercise and having active lifestyle are good practices that will help us to maintain a healthy body.

Let us test our knowledge

1. What are the sensory organs that connect us to the environment around us?

2. Name three things you must do to maintain healthy eyes.

3. Give three actions that must be followed for the protection of the ear.

4. What are the four main tastes that are felt by the tongue?

5. Give five functions performed by the skin.

6. Name four health habits that must be followed by us to be healthy.

122For Free Distribution.

The lessons we studied up to now have shown the things which are important to achieve good health. A person with good health is capable to do his day-to-day activities efficiently and successfully. In other words healthy person has a good physical, mental and social fitness.

By this lesson you can know about physical fitness, mental fitness, social fitness and the importance of maintaining fitness. And also you can learn how to balance your emotions.

Fitness

The teacher of Health walked in to the class happily.

Teacher : Good morning children!Students : Good morning Teacher!Teacher : Please be seated now. Yesterday I asked you to find out what fitness means. Who was able to find anything about fitness?Lahiru : Teacher, my elder brother told me that fitness is the ability to do a task in the correct manner.

9Let us improve fitness for a balanced life

123For Free Distribution.

Teacher : Thank you Lahiru, what your brother has told you is correct. I am pleased that you took time to do what I asked you. Let me explain it to you further…

Fitness is the ability we have, to complete our activities successfully.

We can identify three main aspects of fitness.

Physical fitness is the ability of a person to do a physical activity in the proper manner with maximum efficiency.

Nimal : Teacher, then what are the factors that affect physical fitness?Teacher : Factors such as sports and exercises, rest, sleep, healthy food have an effect on physical fitness.Nimal : What about correct posture?Teacher : Indeed! That is a very good question. Correct posture does have an impact on physical fitness.Ranga : Then, what is meant by mental fitness, teacher?Teacher : Mental fitness is the ability to live a productive and

happy life after recognising your strengths and facing the daily challenges of life. It gives us the ability to handle stressful situations successfully. Raghu : How can we identify a person who has mental fitness?

Physical Fitness

Social Fitness

Fitness

Mental Fitness

124For Free Distribution.

Teacher :

Ranga : Teacher, wouldn't it be wonderful if we too can live like that?Teacher :

Let us put it into practice

Read the first lesson again and prepare a table of good habits that can be cultivated to improve physical, mental and social fitness. Physical fitnessMental fitnessSocial fitness

Yes of course! That is the kind of students, we want you to be. Engaging in aesthetic activities, yoga exercises, meditation, board games such as chess will help to improve our mental fitness.

Let me tell you about social fitness next. Social fitness is the ability to build up healthy social relations that enable us to perform our day-to-day activities in the most productive manner. People with social fitness are very amicable when dealing with others in society. They respect others and help others. They are obedient to the laws and are flexible.

People with mental fitness spend happy lives. They take correct decisions in life and have self respect. They are able to accept both victory and defeat with the same spirit and they handle stressful situations well.

125For Free Distribution.

Importance of Maintaining Fitness

There are many advantages of maintaining physical, mental and social fitness : • Ability to spend a healthy life• Improved social adaptation• Improved personality• Improved sporting skills• Ability to live happily and free of tension• Increased strength to face challenges• Ability to be a good friend• Suitability for leadership• Ability to provide optimum service to the country, the family and the place of work with the good relations fostered

If we are physically, mentally and socially fit, we can spend a healthy life. Physical illnesses are a challenge that we all have to face on a daily basis. Therefore, let us try to understand this by thinking of such a situation.

• We are not able to carry out our daily routine efficiently when we are ill.

• We are not able to maintain satisfactory relations with our friends and family in a light and happy mood when we are ill.

• We are not able to engage in sports too.

• When we are ill, our physical, mental, social and spiritual fitness is poor. Therefore, we are not able to act in the way we usually do.

• This causes a negative change in our personality.

• Since we are not able to perform the usual activities, we are not very happy or satisfied.

Figure 9.1

126For Free Distribution.

The above example shows us that we are not able to perform well in society when our physical, mental, social and spiritual fitness is poor.

Physical fitness factors

Certain characteristics of our body are useful for our day-to-day activities and these characteristics can be improved through specific activities. These are known as physical fitness factors.

1. Strength2. Speed 3. Endurance4. Flexibility5. Coordination

1. StrengthStrength is the ability to do something against resistance, e.g. lifting an object.

2. Speed Speed gives the ability to do something within a lesser duration of time,e.g. running hundred meters within a shorter period of time.

3. Endurance Endurance is the ability to engage in a task for a longer period of time without feeling any discomfort,e.g. ability to run a longer distance.

4. FlexibilityFlexibility gives you the ability to bend and work your joints within awider range,e.g. gymnastic exercises.

Figure 9.3

Figure 9.4

Figure 9.5

127For Free Distribution.

5. Coordination Coordination allows your nerves and muscles to have a better communication that results in smoother and more accurate movements,e.g. throwing a ball and catching it.

These factors can be developed further through training. They can also be tested using various methods to determine the degree of physical fitness. These tests will help to maintain fitness at an appropriate level.

Let us put it into practice

Be aware of the following fitness tests under your teacher’s guidance.• Assessing the ability to throw• Testing the ability to bend forward• 50m dash run test• Long jump test• 600 m/800 m run test• Activity coordination test

Improving physical fitness factors

Fitness can be improved by engaging in various activities, exercises and sports. If you are engaging in such activity or sport, it is best if you can spend an hour or more on it every day. If you are suffering from an illness or a physical weakness, it is important to follow medical advice when engaging in fitness improvement programmes.

Figure 9.6

128For Free Distribution.

The following activities are a few that you can carry out in order to improve your physical fitness.

1. Rapid walking2. Jogging3. Cycling4. Various jumping activities5. Swimming6. Running on sand or on the beach7. Engaging in a simple game such as ''meeyo meemo"8. Skipping rope exercise 9. Engaging in a sport (volleyball, netball, football, badminton or any other similar game)

Rhythm

A regular repeated pattern of movement or sound is called a rhythm.

Listen to the sounds in the environment. Listen to the sound of the wind, movement of trees, singing of birds and sounds made by other animals. You will be able to recognise that all these sounds have a rhythm of their own. Listen to the sound of your breathing, heartbeat and feel the rhythm of these movements.

Your physical fitness can be improved through engaging in rhythmic activities.

Figure 9.8

Figure 9.7

129For Free Distribution.

Rhythmic activities that you could follow

1. Physical fitness exercises2. Skipping rope exercises3. Ballet exercises4. Exercising to the rhythm of music5. Aerobics6. Rhythmic jumping7. Rhythmic turning.

Doing things with a rhythm has many advantages

1. It reduces fatigue.2. It helps us engage in sports with enjoyment.3. It helps us stay active for a longer period of time.4. It makes our movements attractive.

Let us balance our emotions for our mental fitness

We develop feelings such as sadness, happiness and anger on many occasions in our lifetime. When our feelings are very strong, we call them emotions. Emotions result in physical changes as well as behavioural changes in us. Our ability to have balanced emotions, i.e., our ability to behave in a balanced manner at a time we are emotional, is a characteristic of mental well being.

Some of the emotions we feel are very pleasant and they bring positive outcomes. Happiness, excitement, enjoyment, gratitude, sympathy and generosity are some pleasant emotions. Anger, fear, disgust, sadness and jealousy are unpleasant emotions.

It is important to identify these pleasant and unpleasant emotions that are felt by you or by others at different times. The ability to identify emotions, understanding the importance of expressing emotions and

130For Free Distribution.

identification of methods that help to balance emotions, will be useful to maintain favourable mental health.

• While you are at the marketplace, your mother refuses to buy the toy you asked for.• Your grandmother gifts you a new outfit on your birthday.• Your principal announces at the assembly that a student from your class has won the first place in an inter-provincial athletics competition.

Note down the emotions that you and others connected to the incident, would have felt at each of the situations given in the table 9.1.

SituationMy feelingsFeelings of the othersYour mother refuses to buy the toy you asked forAnger............................................................................................Grandmother gifts you with a new outfit on your birthday

....................................................HappinessLove

Finding out that a student from your class has won first place in an inter-provincial athletics competition

Happiness....................................................

....................................................

There may be other similar incidents that you have faced. Write down the emotions that you and others might have felt at such times. Recognising and understanding emotions will help you maintain good relations with other people.

Discuss pleasant emotions and unpleasant emotions with other students in your class

Table 9.1

131For Free Distribution.

Let us put it into practice

Collect images that show different emotions through facial expressions from newspapers, magazines and books and make a booklet. Write down the occasions that would cause those emotions.

Factors that influence emotions

1. Situation2. How we interpreted the situation3. Our personality4. Behaviour of the others

Emotions we feel can differ according to the situation. We feel happy when we win or when someone praises us. Losing something, not being able to achieve what we want would make us feel sad.

The way we interpret an incident will influence the emotions we feel. For example, if you are able to understand that your mother refused to buy the toy you wanted because she wanted to spend that money on something more useful than a toy, you will be able to control your emotions. Then, you will be able to face the incident without feeling upset.

You may have noticed that some people have a quick temper while some people are very patient. Quick temper, kindness, patience and offering to handle responsibility are personality traits.

Emotions that are felt and the ability to control those emotions depend on the personality of each person. Furthermore, feelings and behaviour of other people have an influence over our emotions. For example, if we go to watch a game, the music, dancing and cheering by others to express their joy will make us feel happy too.

132For Free Distribution.

Balancing our emotions will enable us to maintain a good mental health. Maintaining our mental health has many advantages and it gives us the opportunity to be a virtuous person in society.

Advantages of emotional balance

• Happiness• Recognition in society• Developing personality• Maintaining good interpersonal relationships• Ability to be calm and not aggressive• Having less conflicts

How to maintain emotional balance?

• Identify the feelings you get• Control your emotions• Discuss with others, the emotions you have and the way you must respond• Maintain good interpersonal relationships• Take steps to reduce stress• Engage in sports activities

It is important that we try to control our responses to emotions such as anger and sadness.

Figure 9.5

Figure 9.6

133For Free Distribution.

In order to control our responses, first we must identify what these emotions are.

Instead of reacting to emotions such as sadness, anger and fear immediately, we can discuss these situations and identify reasons that caused these emotions with a friend or member of the family. It will help us to control our emotions and react better.

Maintaining good relationships with others will reduce the unwholesome emotions we feel and increase positive emotions such as happiness.In addition to that, balanced emotions will help us reduce stress and be more relaxed.

Can you remember that you learnt, what you can do when you have unpleasant emotions, in the first lesson

Let us put it into practice

There are some small activities that can help us control unwholesome emotions as soon as they are felt by us. Read the relevant section in the f irst lesson and find a few such activities.

Let us see the world through others’ eyes

The cloud game can be played with two or three friends or members of the family• Go out into the open from where you can see the sky (in the morning or evening) when there are clouds.• Look at one or few clouds. • Imagine a figure after looking at the shape of the cloud.• Explain to the others about the figure while drawing it in space with your finger (Explain it quickly before the shape of the cloud changes)• Exchange your ideas about the figures in the clouds seen by each individual.

134For Free Distribution.

Enjoy the benefits that you gain from this game

- Seeing the same thing in different ways - The ability to explain to the others what one sees - The ability to listen to others - The ability to respect views of others

Now we know....

Fitness is the ability to engage in day-to-day activities successfully.

Maintaining physical, mental and social fitness will enable us to live a healthy life.

Physical fitness factors are important when improving fitness. Fitness testing is used to measure these factors. Physical fitness factors can be improved through training.

Rhythm is important to carry out our day-to-day activities in an efficient manner.

Figure 9.7

135For Free Distribution.

Pleasant and unpleasant emotions can be created in us as responses to various situations.

These emotions are influenced by the situation, our interpretation of the situation, our personality and the behaviour of others. A person with balanced emotions will have a sound mental health and good interpersonal relations.

Identifying the emotions we feel, discussing our emotions with others, maintaining good interpersonal relations and reducing stress are important to maintain emotional balance.

Let us test our knowledge

1. Give three advantages of maintaining fitness.

2. Write down three advantages of using rhythm in your day-to-day activities.

3. Write five characteristics of fitness.

4. Write five activities that can be carried out to improve fitness.

5. Give the factors that influence emotions.

6. What are the advantages of emotional balance?

7 What can you do to maintain emotional balance?

136For Free Distribution.

We have to face various challenges in our day-to-day life. Illnesses, accidents, disasters, abuse and stress are some of these challenges that we face in daily life. Being able to face these challenges will give us the opportunity to live a happy life.

By studying this lesson, you will get to know, causes of diseases, their complications and preventive measures. Similarly, get the knowledge of handling situations such as accidents, disasters, abuse and expectations.

Diseases

Diseases that can affect our bodies can be divided into two main types, namely, communicable diseases and non-communicable diseases.

Communicable diseases

Kumari has caught a cold. Therefore, she is finding it difficult to concentrate in class. She is sneezing often and her eyes are tearing. A few days later, Kumari’s friend Selvi too developed a cold.

Let us be aware and face challenges

10

137For Free Distribution.

How did Kumari catch the cold?Is it possible that Kumari’s friend Selvi caught the cold from Kumari after a few days?What are the diseases that can spread from person to person?

Some diseases that can spread from person to person are listed below along with the way it spreads.

Table 10.1

DiseaseHow it spreadsHow to prevent the spreading

Common cold/Tuberculosis

Germs can be found in nasal fluids and droplets that are expelled through sneezing and coughing. These germs are inhaled or spread into the body from contaminated hands throughthe respiratory system.

Avoiding public places when you are ill.Covering mouth and nose when sneezing. Washing hands with soap.Opening windows during daytime and making sure there is proper ventilation and sufficient sun light.

138For Free Distribution.

DiseaseHow it spreadsHow to prevent the spreading

DiarrhoeaTyphoidWater, food and flies.Drinking boiled water.Eating food that is prepared hygienically.Covering food and beverages to prevent flies and other pests from contaminating them.Using a toilet.Washing your hands with soap after using the toilet.Washing hands with soap before preparing meals and before eating.

Dengue Filaria and other diseases transmitted through mosquitoes

Vector mosquito bitesDestroying mosquito breeding places.Keeping the environment clean.Avoid staying outdoors at times mosquitoes are active.Closing the doors and windows in the evening to prevent mosqui-toes entering your house.Covering louvers with mesh.Applying mosquito repellents and using mosquito nets.

The above mentioned diseases either directly or through vectors (desease transmitters) such as mosquitoes can spread from one person to another.

139For Free Distribution.

Non-communicable diseases

Diseases that do not spread from one person to another are known as non-communicable diseases. Diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiac diseases, cancers and mental illness are some of the non-communicable diseases.

The following factors increase the risk of non-communicable diseases:

• Eating food that has high salt, sugar or fat content• Not eating sufficient quantity of vegetables, fruits and high fibre food• Not having an active lifestyle and not engaging in exercises• Being overweight or obese• Mental stress• Use of alcohol and drugs/smoking• Spending more time in sedentary activities (watching television/ playing computer games) for long hours• Genetic factors (what is passed down from generation to generation).

Disease preventive measures

1. Personal hygiene

Personal hygiene is very important in preventing the spread of diseases.Personal hygiene refers to the good habits that we can follow to maintain cleanliness. Cleanliness will prevent illnesses and help us stay healthy while creating pleasantness.

140For Free Distribution.

The following are good habits that we must follow to maintain our personal hygiene:

• Brushing your teeth in the morning and before going to bed• Bathing daily• Wearing clean clothes• Combing and keeping hair clean• Clipping nails short and keeping them clean• Brushing teeth or rinsing the mouth after meals• Washing hands with soap before meals• Washing hands with soap after using the toilet• Avoid sharing clothes, towels, combs etc.

2. Cleanliness of the environment

A clean environment will help prevent the spread of diseases and it will also create a pleasant surrounding. It is very important for our well-being. A clean environment will prevent the breeding of vectors of diseases such as flies, mosquitoes, cockroaches and mice. The following are actions that can be taken to maintain the cleanliness of the environment:

• Keeping our homes clean• Dispose garbage in the proper manner• Maintaining and keeping the drainage system clean• Ensure to maintain standard distance between the well and the toilet pit.• Constructing a protective wall to prevent contaminating the well from dirty water • Using a toilet• Taking the following action to destroy mosquito breeding grounds- Burying plastic cups, empty bottles and coconut shells etc. that could collect water (breaking egg shells, rambutan peels etc. into smaller bits before disposing them)

Figure 10.1

141For Free Distribution.

- Removing gutters or keeping them clean so that water does not stagnate- Destroying places that can collect water and become mosquito breeding grounds- Specially breeding places of Dengue mosquitoes should be destroyed on a weekly basis.

3. Immunization

Natural immunity of our body prevents diseases and it can be improved by having a balanced diet and engaging in proper exercise. In addition to that, we can get immunity against certain diseases through vaccination.

Figure 10.2 - Breeding places for mosquitoes.

142For Free Distribution.

Let us Learn More

The following are some of the diseases that can be prevented through vaccination:TetanusTuberculosis DiphtheriaWhooping coughMeaslesMumpsRubellaHepatitis A and BJapanese encephalitisPolioChicken pox

4. Healthy life style

Following a healthy lifestyle will help us to prevent non-communicable diseases. As mentioned above, the risk of illnesses such as diabetes, high blood pressure, cardiac diseases, cancers and mental illnesses will depend on our genes and our lifestyle.

The following will help us to prevent non communicable diseases:

• Following good food habits• Active lifestyle and exercises• Maintaining the appropriate Body Mass Index (BMI)• Sufficient sleep and rest• Avoiding alcohol, drugs and smoking• Getting rid of mental stress.

Figure 10.3

143For Free Distribution.

Negative consequences of illness

When we have developed an illness such as the cold, the physical discomfort makes it hard for us to carry out the daily activities in the usual manner. People with illnesses such as heart attacks and cancers might continue to be ill over a long period of time. That would disrupt education and employment and also increase economic hardships.

The following are negative consequences that may arise due to illnesses in general: • Physical and mental discomfort• Difficulty in carrying out day-to-day activities• Disruption of education• Weakening of the body due to recurrent illnesses• Illnesses such as diarrhoea can cause malnutrition and stunted growth• Reduced income due to disruption of livelihood• Economic hardships due to higher expenditure for treatment• Disability• Death due to critical illnesses.

Other challenges of day-to-day life

1. Accidents2. Disasters3. Abuse and sexual assault4. Expectations

Accidents

We may face various accidents during day-to-day activities. These accidents could happen at any place like home, workplace, school or the road.

144For Free Distribution.

Accidents that could happen at home

• Getting injured by sharp tools and pointed objects• Falling from unprotected, higher places• Being bitten by dogs, cats, rats or snakes• Being poisoned due to unsafe storing of Agrochemicals or medicinal drugs • Food poisoning • Getting electrocuted by electricity leakage, exposed electricity cables, sockets, etc• Injuries due to lightning• Burns caused by firewood, gas cookers unsafe oil lamps,and hot liquids while cooking• Facing accidents while lighting fireworks

Small children are especially prone to accidents while at home or at school. Home accidents can be minimized by watching over small children by adults, keeping sharp tools and pointed objects out of the reach of small children, and storing poisonous substances safely under lock and key. Let us put it into practice1. Discuss the nature of home accidents and precautionary measures that can be adopted to prevent such accidents.2. What are the accidents that could happen at school? What precautions can be taken to prevent such accidents?

How to prevent road accidents?

1. Motorists and pedestrians must obey road rules.2. Avoid driving when feeling sleepy or tired.3. Vehicles must be maintained in good condition. 4. Drunk driving and walking on roads after consuming liquor must be avoided.

Figure 10.4

145For Free Distribution.

5. Pedestrians must walk on the right hand side of the road.6. Pedestrians must cross the road using pedestrian crossings and avoid crossing the road when the red light appears at crossing.7. Pedestrians must wear light coloured clothing when walking on roads at night.8. Walking more than two abreast on roads must be avoided by pedestrians.

Disasters

Natural disasters are unfavourable situations that arise due to unexpected changes in nature. Floods, landslides, tornadoes, draught, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions and earthquakes are examples of disasters.

We can protect the lives of all by being thoughtful and acting with care at a time of disaster.

The following are methods that can be adapted to do so:

• Having a pre prepared plan on how to face a disaster• Keeping a list of telephone numbers of relevant persons and places to inform at the time of a disaster• Immediately moving to a safe location from the place where the disaster has occurred• If people have been injured, providing first-aid before sending them to hospital• Being mindful of the food and beverages that are taken.

Figure 10.5

146For Free Distribution.

Abuse

Some individuals that violate social norms and laws may engage in abusive activities, especially against children and women.

The following are some actions that can be taken to be safe from abuse:

• Avoiding being alone at home or other places• Avoiding talking to unknown people if an unfamiliar person tries to take you away from a safe environment such as the school, refuse to do so and inform an elder about it• If anyone tries to kiss you, touch you or if you are asked to do something you do not want to do, or do anything that makes you uncomfortable, leave that place immediately and inform parents or teachers about it.

Expectations

You might feel stressed when you are coping with expectations such as becoming a leader, getting through an examination, winning sporting event or competition. These are challenges that we all have to face in our life. Therefore, it is important to develop the skills that would enable us to face such challenges successfully.

Developing life skills to face expectations;

1' Self understanding and self esteem2' Decision making 3' Problem solving 4' Coping with stress 5' Critical thinking6' Creative thinking

Figure 10.6

147For Free Distribution.

7' Emotional balance8' Good interpersonal relationships9' Productive communication10' Empathy

Facing challenges

The above skills needed to face the challenges of day-to-day life in a successful manner, are known as life skills. We have already learnt about most of these life skills under mental and social well being in first lesson. We are able to face challenges successfully by increasing our awareness and developing those life skills.

Let us put it into practice

Create a story on finding solutions to an issue using the above life skills. Apply life skills to each incident in your story.

Read the story given in the first lesson for example.

Now we know....

Diseases can be divided into two groups as communicable diseases and non-communicable diseases.

Communicable diseases can spread directly from person to person or through a vector such as mosquitoes.

Diseases can be prevented by maintaining personal hygiene, cleanliness of the environment, obtaining treatment for the illnesses without delay, immunization and following a healthy lifestyle.

Other challenges we have to face in life include accidents, disasters, abuse and expectations.

Awareness and development of life skills will help us to face these challenges and stress in life.

148For Free Distribution.

Let us test our knowledge

1. What are the two main categories into which the diseases that affect us can be divided?

2. Name three communicable diseases.

3. What are the negative consequences of illness?

4. Give four methods used to control and prevent diseases?

5. What are the challenges that we have to face in our day-to-day life?

6. Write five things that can be done to prevent road accidents.

7. Write three things that can be done to be safe from abuse.

8. Write down some actions that can be taken at a time of a disaster

9. Name several life skills, that help us to face expectations.