==== BLOCKS ==== 

Grade 11

ENGLISH

Pupil's Book

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2015

Second Print - 2016

Third Print - 2017

Fourth Print - 2018

Fifth Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0304-7

Published by : The Educational Publications Department Printed by : Sisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd. No. 110, Pagoda Road, Pitakotte.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®

AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ®|ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷» |»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ

¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hß JØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀ ö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á ¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.

BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.

v

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj KariyawasamMinister of Education

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

vii

A Word to the Teacher

The Board of Writers and Editors are honored to be a part of this national endeavour to write and edit the Grade 11 English textbook and workbook for the students of this country. The textbook is designed to help the students to learn and use language in different situations locally and internationally. The book also contains additional information for the teachers in the form of competency levels and the corresponding activities with the hope of making the task of teaching easier. Furthermore, the book is designed to accommodate the different and varying proficiency levels of the students with the hope of addressing the needs of the larger student population of this country. In addition, the lessons are chronologically sequenced to avoid any confusion that may arise in the teaching process.

It is recommended that this book be used as guide to the teachers and the students on the expected national standards and teachers are encouraged to use supplementary material as much as possible in the classroom. We thank all those who worked with us and hope that we will be able to make a difference in the lives of our students who are keen and enthusiastic to learn English.

Board of WritersBoard of Editors

viii

Monitoring and Supervision - W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications Department

Direction - W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner of Educational Publications (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination - Ranjith Iluppitiya Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

W. Indumini Darshika Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department Panel of Editors

1. Dilini Chamali Walisundara - Senior Lecturer Department of English University of Sri Jayawardenepura

2. Bimba Maheshi Weerasuriya - Director of Education ( English and Foreign Languages ) Ministry of Education

3. W.M. Gamini Gunathilake - Senior Lecturer Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya

4. Darshana Samaraweera - Director Department of English National Institute of Education 5. W. Indumini Darshika - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

viii

ix

Panel of Writers

1. R.W.P.L.K. Rambukwella - Teacher WP/Pili/ Lankasabha Vidyalaya Moratuwa

2. H. A. Biyantha Kumari Wijepala - Teacher Gurukula College Kelaniya

3. Esala Erangi Malawithanthri - Master Trainer Kalutara Zonal Education Office

4. H. M. Ganga Damayanthi Herath - Master Trainer Teacher Center Nikaweratiya 5. Anura Dhammika Edirimanne - Teacher St. John’s College Nugegoda Language Editing

R.M.D. Rohan - Lecturer Pasdunrata National College of Education

Proof Reading

E.A . Amarasena - Parliamentary Interpreter Illustrations Ruwan Indrajith Upasena - Teacher St. Joseph Boys' School Grandpass, Colombo 14Cover Design

Charani Nishamini Alahakoon - Computer Assistant Educational Publications DepartmentComputer Designing & Formatting

Charani Nishamini Alahakoon - Computer Assistant Educational Publications Department

ix

x

xi

Contents

Pages

1. Our Responsibilities 01

2. Facing Challenges 14

3. Great Lanka 25

4. For A Better Tomorrow 35

5. Best Use Of Time 48

6. A Moment Of Fun 59

7. A Simple Living 73

8. Reading Is Fun 90

9. Enigma 102 10. Choices In Life 114

xi

xii

Competency Levels to Be Covered in Grade Eleven

No. of Competency LevelsCompetency

1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.51

2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.72

3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.83

4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.84

5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.85

6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10, 6.116

7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.87

8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.5, 8.6, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.10, 8.11, 8.12, 8.13, 8.14, 8.15, 8.16, 8.17, 8.188

The Book at a Glance

UnitCompetency LevelLesson/Activity

1Our Responsibilities

1.1,1.2,1.3,1.4Activity 12.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5,2.6, 2.7

Activity 2

8.2, 8.6, 8.8Activity 31.3, 5.2, 5.6, 5.7, 6.2 Activity 47.7Activity 54.4Activity 66.3Activity 76.6, 6.7, 8.9Activity 83.2, 5.3, 7.4Activity 95.3Activity 107.4Activity 117.3Activity 128.13Activity 13

xiii

2Facing Challenges

5.1, 8.9, 8.13, 8.14Activity 15.1Activity 24.3, 5.2, 6.2, 6.6, 6.9 Activity 37.1, 7.2, 8.3, 8.13, 8.14

Activity 4

1.2, 5.6Activity 55.7, 7.5, 8.13Activity 63.1, 7.7Activity 77.5, 7.8Activity 86.3Activity 95.1, 6.1, 6.3Activity 106.11Activity 117.6Activity 127.6Activity 135.4Activity 143Great Lanka

1.1, 1.4Activity 13.3Activity 25.1Activity 31.2, 5.2Activity 45.2, 5.3Activity 56.6Activity 68.4Activity 76.1Activity 84.7, 7.1, 7.8Activity 94.7, 5.6, 5.8, 8.13Activity 101.2, 5.6, 7.1, 7.8Activity 117.5, 7.8, 8.11Activity 127.8Activity 13

xiv

4For a Better Tomorrow

1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 4.7, 5.2, 5.6, 6.9

Activity 1

4.3, 6.6Activity 24.7, 6.9Activity 37.5Activity 48.2, 8.12, 8.13, 8.5Activity 56.11Activity 65.1Activity 74.7, 5.3, 5.6Activity 83.1Activities 9,104.3, 5.2, 5.3Activity 112.1Activities 12, 137.8Activity 148.18Activity 15

5Best Use of Time

5.1, 7.2, 8.3, 8.4, 8.98.13

Activity 1

1.2, 1.3, 8.2Activity 28.4Activity 33.7, 3.8Activity 48.7Activity 55.3, 5.4Activity 62.3, 2.7, 4.7, 8.2Activity 77.7Activity 85.2, 5.3Activity 97.1, 7.8Activity 105.2, 5.3, 5.6Activity 114.7, 6.9Activity 125.7Activity 135.7Activity 14

xv

6A Moment of Fun

1.1, 1.2Activity 15.2Activity 26.4Activities 3,46.1Activity 55.3Activity 67.3Activity 75.2, 7.5Activity 84.3, 1.1, 1.3, 5.6Activity 91.1,1.2, 8.3Activity 105.4Activity 116.5, 8.17Activity 123.3Activity 136.5, 8.17Activity 144.1Activity 157Simple Living

7.4, 8.9Activity 13.3Activity 26.1, 7.8Activity 31.5Activity 44.6, 4.8Activities 5,6,74.3, 5.2Activity 81.3, 4.3, 5.3, 7.5Activity 92.2, 2.7Activity 108.7Activity 118.15Activities 12,136.11Activity 145.1Activity 157.4Activities 16,177.6Activity 188Reading is Fun

5.6, 6.2Activity 15.7Activity 25.2, 6.6Activities 3,4,5 6.6Activity 68.1, 8.7Activity 77.7Activity 83.5Activity 9

xvi

6.8Activity 109Enigma

1.1, 1.2Activity 15.2, 5.3Activity 24.3, 4.7, 5.2Activity 33.4, 3.6Activity 47.8Activity 57.5Activity 64.2, 8.18Activity 75.1, 7.2Activity 84.5Activity 95.5, 6.8, 7.6Activity 106.3Activity 1110Choices in Life

5.3, 5.6Activity 15.3Activity 25.3Activity 36.1, 6.5Activity 48.16Activity 58.4Activity 67.5Activity 72.4, 5.4Activity 84.3, 4.7, 5.2Activity 96.10Activity 108.18Activity 113.3Activity 12

Dear Student,

Please do not write anything in this book. Use your exercise book to do the activities that appear here.

1 For free distribution

1OUR RESPONSIBILITIES

Activity 1

Act out

Vikum and Chamindu meet each other in the bus on their way to school.

Vikum - Good morning Chamindu! The bus is crowded today. Give me your school bag or would you rather sit here?Chamindu - Good morning! Thank you Vikum. It’s not too far. Just keep my bag.Vikum - Sure. By the way, did you manage to find facts for the debate next week?Chamindu - Yes. I've planned to visit the local library too.Vikum - We’ve got to propose the idea “Discipline cannot be achieved only through laws”.Chamindu - Yes. I’ve read some articles about it. My sister also downloaded some articles from the internet. It’s quite an interesting topic, isn’t it?Vikum - Of course! My mother says it’s a timely topic that all school children should be made aware of.Chamindu - I think so too. Discipline cannot be imposed only through laws.

Vikum - Hmm… It will be an interesting debate. Chamindu - There is an article on vandalism too in my sister’s collection of articles.Vikum - What’s that? I’ve never heard that word before. Can you please repeat the word?Chamindu - Van-da-lism. Let’s read my sister’s articles and discuss more at school.

Vikum - Oh! Here comes a pregnant mother. I’ll offer my seat to her.

For free distribution2

Activity 2

Identify the following punctuation marks in the dialogue between Vikum and Chamindu.

Copy one sentence as an example for each into your writing book.

a. Full stop b. Question mark c. Apostrophe used in contractions d. Apostrophe used to show possession e. Inverted commas f. Comma g. Exclamation mark

Activity 3

Chamindu visited the library and needed the help of the librarian to find information for the debate. Write the conversation he had with the librarian using appropriate punctuation marks. Enact it in the class.

Start like this…

Librarian - Good afternoon! Can I help you?

Chamindu - ……………………………......(greets and tells what he wants)

Librarian -………………………......…….(asks for the topic of the debate)

Chamindu -…………………………………...............…….(gives the topic)

Librarian -…………………………(expresses his ability to help and asks whether he needs to borrow books)

Chamindu - ……………………………………...….. (expresses his thanks and says he wants to borrow books)Librarian -……….……………………….(describes where the books are)

Chamindu - ………………………………..(says he will go and find them)

Librarian - ……….………………(asks whether he needs any other help)

Chamindu - ……………………………..(says no and thanks the librarian)

3 For free distribution

Activity 4

Reading / Writing

This is the article Chamindu’s sister found on vandalism. Read it and do the activities that follow.

VANDALISM /vændəlizəm/

Vandalism is an offence that is caused

when a person deliberately destroys,

alters or defaces someone else's property

without permission. It is mostly aimed at

public property such as public transport

services, bus stops, parks, road signs and other public places. It can also occur at

individual level too such as scratching someone’s car or distorting the information on a

person’s website.

Among many reasons, personal attitudes and basic social problems are at the root of

vandalism. It may occur because of a lack of meaningful activities, disciplinary problems,

and negative feelings such as revenge, boredom, anger, and frustration. It can be the

result of peer group pressure, playfulness, curiosity and pleasure too. Although most

vandals do not have a clear motive for their acts, and may consider it as a simple act

of fun or art. However, it is a punishable crime with imprisonment, monetary fines, or

both as laws exist in a country to prevent vandalism.

Certain effects of vandalism are considered insignificant while others are considered

extremely severe. However, it is a problem that affects everyone in some way or other.

For free distribution4

It can affect one’s family, friends, and the community. When facilities, such as public transport services, parks and public restrooms are vandalized, it makes using such places unpleasant and demoralizing. As a result of vandalism, fire and emergency services are affected by increased workloads. Citizens of a country pay their taxes in order to build a better community for the future generation. But when public property is vandalized, they are the ones who have to pay for the damage. There are different approaches that can be taken to prevent vandalism. It can be done by educating individuals, especially the young people about its consequences and nature. Another way to prevent vandalism is to use property designs such as ceramic tiles on walls which are easy to clean. In addition, rough textured surfaces where

scrawling with graffiti is impossible, reduce vandalistic behaviour in public places. An essential approach to reducing vandalism is to monitor the condition of a property regularly. Studies reveal that vandalism carried

out by individuals of all ages increases when people think they are left out from the society or community. Thus, involvement in community activities can encourage a sense of belonging and pride which will help them to respect and think positively

about their community. Everyone should understand the duties and responsibilities of a citizen and decide what is right and what is wrong. Therefore, in preventing vandalism, self-discipline plays a bigger role than laws.

5 For free distribution

i) In column A there are some actions related to vandalism. Match them with their meanings in column B.

A B

destroychanging the form or structure

alterdamaging a surface in a visible manner

defacedamaging beyond use or repair

distortgiving false or misleading information

ii) Indicate whether the following sentences are TRUE or FALSE.

a. Vandalism can occur both at personal and public levels. ( )b. Vandals always have a clear reason for their vandalistic behaviour. ( )c. Vandalism has negative effects on the whole community. ( )d. Educating people about the negative effects of vandalism is a good way to prevent it. ( )e. Laws of a country play the most important role in preventing vandalism. ( )

iii) Write answers to the following questions.

a. What is vandalism?b. Give two reasons for vandalism.c. How is vandalism punished?d. Write down two effects of vandalism on people living in a community.e. List down two ways that can be used to prevent vandalism.f. Copy the sentence which says that vandalism can be prevented by making the young people aware of it.

g. What do the following pronouns underlined in the passage refer to? i. it (paragraph 1)- ii. they (paragraph 3)-

For free distribution6

iv) 1. List out the acts of vandalism that can occur in your school. e.g.: Scrawling graffiti on school textbooks.2. Work in small groups. Suggest ways to prevent vandalism at school level.

Activity 5

Writing

Involvement in community activities can encourage a sense of belonging and pride which will help people to respect and think positively about their community.

Imagine you are the secretary of the Youth Society of your village or town and you are going to organize a community activity for the local residents. Write a notice informing the public about the activity and requesting their help.

e.g.: Clearing the mosquito breeding grounds in the area Cleaning the children's ward in the local hospital

Vocabulary

Note how the following words are formed using suffixes.

vandal (noun)

vandalistic (adjective) vandalize (verb) vandalism(noun)

7 For free distribution

Prefixes and Suffixes

• Adding a prefix to the base

Affixes added before the base form of a word are called prefixes. Prefixes do not generally alter the word-class.

e.g.: in-, mis-, un-, re-, , im-, ir-, dis-

significant (adjective)

insignificant (adjective)

• Adding a suffix to the base

Affixes added after the base form of a word are called suffixes. Unlike prefixes, suffixes frequently alter the word-class.

e.g.: -ize, -ful, -less, -ness, -fully, -er, -est, -ly, -tion, -sion, -ment, -ance, -ous, -some

vandal

(noun)

vandalize (verb)

Revision point

Activity 6

Go through the passage on vandalism once again and find examples for words with

1. prefixes2. suffixes3. both prefixes and suffixes

For free distribution8

Indicate the word class of the words you find and their base forms. Follow the example given.

e.g.: Prefixes

pleasant

(adjective) unpleasant (adjective)

Activity 7

How would you advise someone to be a responsible citizen? Write as many instructions as possible using the following modals. Follow the example given. need, ought to, must, should, can

e.g.: You should always help others.

Activity 8

Write five sentences based on the following picture, using the above modals.

9 For free distribution

Activity 9

Listening

You are going to listen to a set of rules to be followed by road users. Put the

relevant numbers of the rules against the different types of users. Some rules are

applicable to many users.

USERRULEPedestrians

Motor cyclists

Car drivers & Passengers

Bus drivers & Passengers

Activity 10

Writing

Read the following letter written by Farah to her friend Kalani and fill in the grid.

18, Lake Drive,Pannipitiya.

27th January 2016

Dear Kalani,

How are you? I hope you are doing fine. Thank you very much for your letter and the birthday card. I was waiting for a letter from you when the postman delivered it. It’s a lovely card made out of natural flowers and leaves which we all admired.

For free distribution10

As you mentioned in your letter, I’m a year older now. I totally agree that we have to think seriously and plan our future. We have to take the responsibility of our own lives.

Kalani, I will tell you how I celebrated my birthday. On my birthday, I donated some books to the local library. My parents said that it was a very thoughtful deed. My father had visited the library a week before he organized this for me. We were given a list of books that they needed. In fact, the librarian had been waiting for a long time to get those books for the library. We were happy to donate some of them. I went with my mother to purchase the books. On my birthday, we went to church in the morning and then delivered the books to the library. I felt happy as I did something useful on my birthday this year. You know what? My brother has already made similar plans for his birthday too.

So Kalani, how are things going on for you? Hope you are having a fantastic time in Nuwara Eliya. Hope to hear from you soon. Give my regards to your parents.

Best Wishes,Farah.

Activity done

By whom

Who helped

Why it was done

How he/she felt afterwards

11 For free distribution

Activity 11

Imagine that one of your friends is interested in donating books to a library. Write the instructions you would give him or her to complete the work successfully. Follow the example given.

e.g. : First you should visit the library. Then…

Activity 12

Write a letter to one of your friends describing a good deed you have done. Include the following:

About your good deed

When and where it was done

Who helped you

How you felt on this day

Grammar

Pay attention to the following sentences taken from Farah’s letter. They are all in different forms of the past tense.

1. On my last birthday, I donated some books to the local library.2. I was waiting for a letter from you when the postman delivered it.3. My father had visited the library a week before he organized this work for me.4. He had been waiting for a long time to get those books for the library.

For free distribution12

Past Tense

The Simple Past Tense is usually used to express a single action done at a particular point of time in the past.

e.g.: On my last birthday, I donated some books to the local library.

The Past Continuous Tense is usually used to express an action still going on at a point of time in the past.

e.g.: I was waiting for a letter from you when the postman delivered it.

The Past Perfect Tense is usually used whenever we wish to say that some past action had been completed before another action started.

e.g.: My father had visited the library a week before he organized this donation for me.

The Past Perfect Continuous Tense is used to describe an action that began in the past and went on for some time in the past. e.g.: He had been waiting for a long time to get those books for the library.

Revision point

Activity 13

Fill in the blanks with the correct form of the verb given within brackets. You need to revise all three tenses to complete this activity.

1. Ravindran is a clerk. He ……………. (work) in a bank.

2. “You can’t meet the teacher now. She …………. (conduct) a lesson.”

3. Mr. Bandara …………. (sell) his car last week.

4. Suwimali ………………. (sweep) the classroom by the time the teacher

started the lesson.

13 For free distribution

5. “I …………….. (lend) you the story book if you promise to return it

before Friday.”

6. By the time we reached Kandy, my father ………(drive) non-stop for

nearly two hours.

7. Nisali …………. (finish) her homework. She can play with her brother

now.

8. Venura ……….. (play) badminton with his sister every evening.

9. “You can’t talk to my brother now. He ………(sleep).”

10. “It ………… (rain) since last night. I wonder when it will stop.”

For free distribution14

2FACING CHALLENGES

Activity 1

Speaking

Look at the pictures. Work in pairs. What are the activities shown in these pictures?

A

ED

C

B

15 For free distribution

Activity 2

Vocabulary

Challenge !

Copy the following phrases into your writing book.

Match the phrases with the above pictures.

Water rafting, Fall with gravity, Outdoor activity, Team activity, Adventurous, Riding on waves, Pole vaulting, Natural /artificial waves, Three major styles, Parachuting, Inflatable raft, Challenging, Need speed and flexibility, Surfboard, Popular, Skydiving, Rough water/white water, Exiting, An aircraft, Jump high up/land safely

Activity 3

Reading/ Writing

Read the following text and answer the questions that follow.

Water rafting is an adventurous outdoor team activity. It is done in white water or different degrees of rough water using an inflatable raft. This sport is challenging and considered to be dangerous, if the necessary safety precautions are not followed. This has now become a popular sport. However, it is necessary to minimize the impact of this sport on nature. There should be a “leave no trace” policy when engaging in rafting. The sportsmen should learn to dispose of waste properly, leave what they find in the wilderness, respect wild life, keep fires small etc.

There is another popular action sport called skydiving. This is also known as parachuting. Skydiving is done by jumping out of an aircraft and falling for as long as one safely can before opening the parachute. Once the sportsmen jump out of the aircraft they fall freely with the aid of gravity. The real challenge is to slow down the fall and reach the earth with the help of the parachute. This sport is practised even during the 18th century and it is said that in 1797, Andre Jacques Garnerin jumped from a hot air balloon with a parachute. It was the first incident of truly modern skydiving. In the military it is used as a back up safety mechanism for airmen. Many modern militaries use skydiving for troop

For free distribution16

deployment. Wildfire fighters also parachute to reach remote sites, so that they can be on the ground quickly. At present, it is a well-known recreational sport.

Surfing is done with the help of a surfboard. This is an act of riding on a wave, especially a sea wave. This can be challenging when the waves become rough. There are three major styles of surfing. This is done in natural waves as well as in artificial waves. This sport has developed into a number of other types, including skateboarding, wakeboarding, skimboarding, and windsurfing among others. Skateboarding is popular among teenagers. This is an action sport which enables riding and performing tricks on the skateboard.

Pole vaulting is a challenging sport. In this track and field event, the sportsman uses a long, flexible pole as an aid to jump over a bar. Pole jumping competitions were known to the ancient Greeks, Cretans and Celts. The sportsman should have a speed of a sprinter, the flexibility of a gymnast, and the vertical jump of a jumper. This needs courage to jump up in the free air with a pole. The sportsmen need not only to jump a considerable height but also to land correctly. This has been a full medal event at the Olympic Games since 1896 for men and since 2000 for women.

A) State whether the following statements are TRUE or FALSE.

1. Water rafting is an outdoor sport. ( )2. Skydivers do not need parachutes to land. ( )3. Surfing is not a challenging sport. ( )4. Surfing is done only in natural waves. ( )5. Pole vaulting is done by both men and women. ( )

B) Answer the following questions.

1. How can water rafting be dangerous?2. What are the environment friendly practices followed in water rafting?3. What is skydiving?4. For which purposes is skydiving used?5. What are the types of surfing mentioned in the text?6. What are the abilities a pole vaulting sportsman should have to become successful?

17 For free distribution

C) What do the following words refer to? 1. this (in paragraph 1) 2. it (in paragraph 2) 3. this (in paragraph 4)

D) Find similar words to the following from the text. 1. throw away 2. reduce 3. help

E) Copy the following grid into your writing book and place the underlined words in the above text in the correct column.

NounsAdjectives VerbsAdverbs

F) Write a subtitle for each paragraph.G) Give a suitable title to the text.

Activity 4

Writing

Work in groups. Discuss the activities shown in the pictures given below and write a description.

For free distribution18

Activity 5

Act out

Nithya : This time we have to organize the morning assembly.Kamalesh : Really? That sounds interesting.Sahas : Yes, each class is given a chance to do it every month.Sujith : Who is going to conduct the assembly?Kamalesh : I think you can do it better, Sahas.Sahas : Me? Oh no!Nithya : Don’t worry, we will help you.Sahas : Alright, I’m ready to take the challenge.

Activity 6

Speaking / Writing

1. What is this discussion about?2. “I’m ready to take the challenge.” What does Sahas mean by this?3. Do you consider this to be a challenge? Why?4. Discuss in pairs and write the programme of the assembly.

Activity 7

Listening / Writing

i) Listen to the short announcements and number the events of the programme in order.

Religious observances School song Morning thought Song by Nithya

ii) Kamalesh is going to deliver a speech on “Challenges make us strong.” Write the announcement for this event and present it to the class.

19 For free distribution

Activity 8

Writing

Kamalesh prepared a mind map when organizing his speech. Work in groups to develop the mind map into a speech and write it in your writing book.

Challenges

make us strong

What is a 'Challenge'?

How challenges can make us strong?

Personal experience

Different types of challenges in life

Successful individualsInviting friends to face challenges

Should and Must e.g.: You should take up this challenge. You must obey the law.

Must is stronger in emphasis than Should.

Revision point

For free distribution20

Activity 9

Complete the blanks using should / shouldn’t / must / mustn’t.

1. You …………… brush your teeth before you go to bed at night. 2. The children ……...… play too much when they have to do homework.3. You ………..... cross the road when the traffic lights are red.4. The parents ……..….allow children to do risky things.5. You ….......… always speak the truth.

Activity 10

Describe each sign given below using ‘should’/ ‘should not’.

abc

edf

21 For free distribution

Reported SpeechPresent → Pasti) Sahas said, “I'm ready to take the challenge”. Sahas said that he was ready to take the challenge.

Will → Would ii) Nithya said to Sahas, “We will help you.” Nithya told Sahas that they would help him.

Revision point

Activity 11

Write the following in reported / indirect speech.

1) “I’m very interested in music,” he said.

2) The children said, “ We will clean our classroom.”

3) My sister said,“ I can finish this project in two weeks.”

4) “You must study hard,” our teacher said to us.

5) Kamal said, “ I bought a new dictionary yesterday.”

Activity 12

Writing

Read the following poem. Add more lines to it using the clues given.

If bees stay at home Rain will soon come If they fly away Fine will be the day

If you see;a rainbow, some dark clouds, mist in the morning

For free distribution22

Activity 13

Writing

Re-order the following pictures. Write a sentence for each picture to build a story on your own.

1

23 For free distribution

Activity 14

Reading

Read, enjoy and answer.

The Challenge

Blessed is the man, indeed,

Who in this life can find;A purpose that can fill his days,

And goals to fill his mind!

The world is filled with little men

Content with here they are;Not knowing joys success can bring,

No will to go that far!

Yet, in this world there is a need,

For men to lead the restTo rise above the "average" life,

By giving of their best!

Would you be one, who dares to try,

When challenged by the task;To rise to heights you've never seen,

Or is that too much to ask?

This is your day a world to win

Great purpose to achieve;Accept the challenge of your goals

And in yourself, believe!

You will be proud of what you've done,

When at the close of day;You look back on your battles won,

Content, you came this way!

by Dr. Heartsill Wilson

For free distribution24

1. According to the poem who are ‘‘blessed men,, and ‘‘little men,,?

2. What type of people does this world need?

3. Write two qualities that people who lead the world should have.

4. How many stanzas are there in this poem?

5. What are the rhyming words found in the poem?

6. What is the message given in the poem?

25 For free distribution

3GREAT LANKA

Activity 1

Act out

Last Sunday, some of Kishan's friends met at his house to prepare a booklet on

Sri Lanka for a class assignment. Kishan was watching a cricket match when

Suresh and Suranga came in.

Suresh : Hey, Kishan, what’s the score?

Kishan : Hi Suresh, hi Suranga. England has scored 23 for 01.

Suranga : Are they still batting?

Kishan : No. It’s the lunch break now.

Suranga : Here, watch this.

Suresh : What’s it? Ah yes, this would be useful for us.

Kishan : Great! It’s a documentary about Sri Lanka.

Suranga : Let’s watch it.

Suresh : There, the others are also coming.

Kishan : Hi friends, we have something interesting to watch.

Vihangi : What’s it?

Suranga : Shh.. Let's watch it first.

For free distribution26

Activity 2

Listening

The friends sat down to watch the programme. Listen to the narration and complete the blanks.

A)1.The match is being played in ____________________.

a) Pallekele b) Sooriyawewa c) Dambulla d) Galle

2. ______________ is the special fishing technique mentioned in the narration.

a) Netting b) Angling c) Stilt fishing d) Spearing

3. The cricket commentators visited different places in the country on the ______________ of the match.

a) first day b) second day c) rest day d) third day

4.__________ ____________ are the commentators.

a) Jack and David b) Boon and John c) David and James d) David and John

5. When flying over the country they saw the ___________________ of the country. a) inhabitants b) greenery c) vegetables d) cultivators

6. They visited____________ and stopped at ________________for lunch. a) Galle / Polonnaruwa b) Polonnaruwa / Trincomalee c) Colombo / Galle d) Trincomalee / Colombo

B)7. ___________ won the toss.8. Sri Lanka scored _________ runs.9. England have lost _________ wicket/s.10. __________ trail by 489 runs.

27 For free distribution

Activity 3

Writing / Speaking

Look at the following map of Sri Lanka. Find the picture clues and mention what each place/city is famous for.

For free distribution28

Activity 4

Speaking

Read aloud the conversation the friends had after watching the documentary and answer the questions that follow.

Radhika : Well, that was good.Rikaz : Yes it was. Did you see the beautiful scenery they had captured?Vihangi : Yes, I wish I could go back to our past, to the time of our ancient kingdoms.Suresh : Me too. Shall we discuss our booklet now?Radhika : What about the presentation?Suranga : Alright, what’s your plan?Suresh : Shall we decide on the topics first and then find the necessary information?Kishan : Oh good, I see your point, Suresh.Madeena : Then, I’ll write on beautiful places of the country.Vihangi : Very well, Madeena, I’ll find information on our kings.Rikaz : Leave some topics for us too.Radhika : Alright. Suranga : I’ll work on important historical places.Radhika : I want to write about endemic animals, birds, trees…Rikaz : Ah, you’ll have a lot of work to do.Suranga : No, that’s fine. We each have something to do.Suresh : You left out my favourite topic.Madeena : What’s that? Vihangi : I’m sure it’s technology.Suresh : Yes, you got it. Suranga : Now we can do a detailed presentation.

1.What was the purpose of their discussion?2.What are the topics they discussed?3.How many friends were engaged in the conversation?

29 For free distribution

Activity 5

Writing

Complete the table given below.

Name of the friendTopic to be done for the presentation

Activity 6

Writing

(i) Find the adjectives used in the conversation. e.g.: beautiful scenery (ii) Use them and make your own sentences.

Activity 7

Speaking / Writing

Discuss in groups and do a presentation on Sri Lanka.

Simple Past Tense

We use the simple past tense when writing or talking about things that happened in the past.

e.g: Some of Kishan's friends met at his house last Sunday.

Revision point

For free distribution30

Activity 8

Writing

Find the past form of the following verbs and make sentences.e.g.: Go – went

1. hear – 2. put – 3. return – 4. inquire – 5. reply – 6. say –

Activity 9

Writing

i) Follow the facts given on one of the kings of Sri Lanka and write a short composition.

King Buddhadasa

– son of King Jettatissa – Anuradhapura kingdom – 4th century B.C. – a just king – did many meritorious deeds – good physician – cured even animals – saw a sick snake one day – operated and cured the snake

ii) Write a short composition about any famous king you know.

31 For free distribution

Reading

Madeena has found some photographs related to Sri Lanka. Read the descriptions.

This is a map of ancient Sri Lanka. The name Ceilan is written on the top left-hand corner. A bay and several points can be seen on the map. There is a ship shown on the map. The country is surrounded by the sea. The map shows a lot of mountains, trees and animals such as elephant, deer, fox etc.

The map includes names of different places, sea and other important landmarks in a different language.

The big rock in the background of the picture is Sigiriya. King Kashyapa built a fortress on top of it. Now, it is listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. There is a group of tourists riding on an elephant. The mahout who is on the elephant has a goad in his hand. The tourists seem to be enjoying the natural beauty of the surroundings. Sigiriya has long been a popular tourist destination because of its natural beauty and historical value.

For free distribution32

Activity 10

a) State whether the following statements are TRUE or FALSE.

1. Madeena has a map of ancient Ceylon in her collection of photographs. ( )2. The map is marked in a different language. ( )3. King Ravana built the Sigiriya rock fortress. ( )4. Sigiriya is considered as one of the wonders of the world. ( )5. Sigiriya is a famous tourist destination. ( )

b) Refer to a dictionary and find synonyms for the following words.

1. ancient – 2. important – 3. popular – 4. built – 5. different –

Activity 11

Speaking / Writing

i) Select any one of the pictures given below and describe it.

ii) Write the description in your writing book.

33 For free distribution

Activity 12

Write a description on one of the famous tourist destinations in Sri Lanka. You may include, - The location - The speciality - Why you like that place - Things to see etc....

Reading

Kishan started practising that presentation.

Good morning, dear teacher and my dear friends! This presentation is on the irrigation system of Sri Lanka which dates back to 300 BC. We, Sri Lankans are proud of the many wondrous water managing systems of the ancient civilizations. We were the first to build water reservoirs to store water which are known as tanks (wewa/kulam). Many Sri Lankan kings such as King Pandukabhaya, King Wasabha, King Mahasen, King Dhathusena, King Agbo I, King Agbo II and King Parakramabahu the Great built tanks to improve farming in Sri Lanka. The ancient kings followed the advice of the Buddhist monks and ruled the country. This led to the ancient concept of ‘tank and stupa’.I’m sure that you all know the reason why these great kings built tanks. Can you tell me why? Well, it’s pretty obvious that the kings had a vision to cultivate the land and to make the country self-sufficient. Now I’ll show you a cross section of a tank.

Well, friends I have some more key points to discuss. I need your help to finish the rest.

For free distribution34

Activity 13

Writing

Work in pairs. Continue the presentation using the rest of the facts given below. Add more details.

- Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa are the kingdoms where we find most

of the tanks

- This irrigation agriculture helped in making ancient Sri Lanka a self-

sufficient country

- Sri Lankans have two seasons for farming

- Rice, the staple food of Sri Lanka

- Man-made lakes

- The royal master builder of tanks was King Parakrambahu the Great

(1164 - 1196 AD)

- Constructed or restored 165 dams, 3910 canals, 163 major tanks and

2376 minor tanks

- Sri Lanka came to be known as the Granary of the East

35 For free distribution

4FOR A BETTER TOMORROW

Activity 1

Act out

Practise this television interview.

Presenter : Good Morning! Once again we join you in your favourite

programme “For a Better Tomorrow.” Our topic today is “Polythene and the

Environment.,, To share some valuable ideas on this topic, we have with us one

of the eminent environmentalists in the country, Mr. Sunil Weerasinghe.

Welcome to the programme, Mr. Weerasinghe.

Sunil Weerasinghe : Thank you. It’s a pleasure to be here.

Interviewer : As we are well aware, polythene has become a major

environmental issue. Talking about polythene and the

environment, what is the biggest problem related to

polythene?

Sunil Weerasinghe : The biggest problem is that most types of polythene

don’t decay. They accumulate in the environment,

and that, in turn, creates many other problems.

Interviewer : I’m sure our viewers would like to know about these problems. Could you tell us something about them?

For free distribution36

Sunil Weerasinghe : Well, it seems that a lot of people have the habit of throwing polythene bags carelessly and haphazardly into the environment. This often leads to problems like land pollution and land infertility. Polythene also blocks sewage systems and water sources. Another problem is that rain water collected in polythene bags provides breeding grounds for mosquitoes. This is really unfortunate. We will be living in an extremely unhealthy environment if such a situation is to continue.

Interviewer : Can’t we burn polythene instead?Sunil Weerasinghe : Unfortunately, that doesn’t help much. Burning polythene creates a lot of harmful gases and substances. They are harmful to all living things.Interviewer : How about the effect of polythene on animal life?Sunil Weerasinghe : Sadly, a lot of animals die after eating polythene as it is not digested.Interviewer : So, what are your suggestions? Should we stop using polythene?Sunil Weerasinghe : Not exactly. I think we should try to minimize the use of polythene. Taking reusable bags when marketing is a possible way of reducing the use of polythene. Recycling polythene is another solution. Interviewer : Reduce, reuse and recycle. We should all think about it. With that thought we come to the end of our programme. Thank you for joining us today, Mr. Weerasinghe.Sunil Weerasinghe : Thank you for inviting me.Interviewer : We hope to meet our viewers next week at the same time. Have a good day!

37 For free distribution

Activity 2

1. Match A and B.

A1. Most types of polythene do not decay.2. Polythene bags are thrown into the environment.3. Rain water is collected in polythene bags.4. Animals eat polythene.5. Polythene bags are collected in water sources.

B a. It causes land pollution. b. They die because of undigested polythene. c. Water is polluted. d. Mosquitoes breed in them. e. They accumulate in the environment.

2. Find the adjectives used in the conversation to describe these words.

e.g.: favourite programme

………………….................. problem…………………….........…. ideas………………….................. pollution……………………….......... environmentalist ……………………….......... gases

3. Find the sentences/ phrases used to:

1. start the TV programme2. introduce the environmentalist to the viewers3. ask the environmentalist’s suggestions on something4. disagree to an idea5. end the TV programme

4. Find the adverbs used in the conversation.

For free distribution38

Adverbs

Adverbs describe the action.

• A lot of people have the habit of throwing polythene bags carelessly . (manner) • It's a pleasure to be here ? (place) • Our topic today is ''Polythene and the Environment''. (time) • We usually eat rice and curry for dinner. (frequency) • I’m extremely sorry for the delay. (degree)

Revision point

Activity 3

The words underlined in these sentences are used incorrectly. Rewrite the sentences correctly.

1. Plants grow quick in the rich soil.

2. Some factories discharge their waste direct into water bodies.

3. I usual use recycled paper for my greeting cards.

4. Our project was successful because everybody worked efficient.

5. Awareness programmes on public health should be conducted regular.

Activity 4

Writing

Write a paragraph about “The three R’s” using the given tree diagram.

39 For free distribution

Reduce

Reuse

Recycle

• Buy only what is necessary

• Buy in bulk to reduce waste created in packaging

• Glass bottles, ceramic cups, paper bags etc. instead of plastic

• Cloth bags, reed baskets

• Cans, glass, plastic, electronic equipment

You may include sentences like:

• Reduce, reuse, recycle; known as the 3 R’s are three great ways to minimize

waste and protect our environment.

• We should always try to reduce the waste we create.

• Reusing is an environmentally friendly habit.

• Recycling is another good way to cut down the accumulation of waste.

Activity 5

Group Work

Write a script for an interview on one of the following topics and conduct the interview in the classroom. You can have a live interview with the whole class as the audience. They could be allowed to ask questions.

Topics : The Dengue Epidemic, Effects of Deforestation, Noise and Air Pollution

For free distribution40

Activity 6

Writing

Convert these sentences to reported speech.

1. The invitee said, “It’s a pleasure to be here.”

2. The interviewer asked, “Should we stop using polythene?”

3. The scientist said, “I’m conducting a research on global warming.”

4. Mr. Soyza said, “I visited Sinharaja forest last month.”

5. Mrs. Fernando said, “I have been to Yala National Park.”

Activity 7

Reading / Writing

Read the following posters and write the message conveyed by each one.

2

" Water scarcity is now the single biggest threat to global food security."

1

41 For free distribution

Do not use fertilizers and pesticides excessively.They destroy beneficial soil organisms.

5

Share newspapers and magazines.

Recycle wastepapers.

Reuse folders, envelops etc.4

Use low energy low wattage bulbs. Turn off lights when they are not needed. Make use of natural light in classrooms and offices by opening windows and blinds.

3

Poster NumberThe message it conveyse.g. 1Save waterDon’t waste water

Activity 8

Complete these sentences using the adjectives and adverbs found in the posters.

natural, soil, global, single, excessively

1. We have to preserve ……………… resources for the future.

2. Accumulation of polythene in the environment has become a

environmental issue.

3. Cutting down trees causes …………….. erosion.

4. Water is precious. We should not waste a ………… drop.

5. The monsoon rains were ……………… heavy this year.

For free distribution42

Activity 9

Listening

Your teacher will read out an announcement. Listen to it and select the correct answer.

1. This announcement is issued by:i. Colombo South Municipal Councilii. Nuwara Eliya Municipal Council

2. This announcement is about: i. a power interruptionii. a water supply interruption

3. The areas that will be affected are:i. Giragama, Kiribathkumbura and Elugodaii. Maskeliya, High Forest and Nanuoya

4. The date of the interruption is:i. 30th of Novemberii. 13th of November

5. The time of the interruption is:i. From 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

ii. 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

6. The reason for the interruption is:i. Shortage of water due to droughtii. Cleaning of the storage tanks

43 For free distribution

Activity 10

Group Work

Select one of the areas given below. Fill in the missing information on your own and prepare an announcement about a scheduled power interruption. Present it to the class. The other groups can note down the information.

AreaDateTime Duration

Affected AreasReason

e.g.:Diyathalawa01/02/201608.00 - 16.00 Kandekumbura,

Rathnodagama

Repairs to the transformers

AnuradhapuraKekirawa,Horowpathana

Installing generators

Trincomalee12/08/2016Kinniya, Morawewa

Pruning trees near power lines

Peradeniya13.00– 17.00 Muruthalawa

Colombo9.00 – 12. 00

For free distribution44

Activity 11

Reading / Writing

Animals on the Verge of Extinction

Lions

Lions were wide-ranging animals. In the past,They wandered freely in Africa, Asia, Europe and India. Now they are confined to Africa and to a small area in India. Loss of habitat, loss of prey and sport hunting have made this majestic animal endangered. Scientists warn that if these activities are to continue, African lions could very well be extinct by 2050.

Polar Bears Polar bears live across the Arctic in Canada, Alaska, Greenland, Russia, Denmark and Norway. They are the first animals to be threatened because of global warming. They need a cold climate, snow and ice of the Arctic regions to survive. When the snow and ice in the polar regions melt, these animals lose their natural habitat. Scientists say that polar bears are in danger of becoming extinct in about 50 years.

Blue Whales

Blue whales live in all the oceans except the polar seas. They have become endangered due to being hunted for blubber and body parts. For this reason they have been declared protected animals since 1966. Global warming also harms blue whales. Temperature changes in water due to global warming may induce migration to wrong places where food supply could be low. It is believed that 10000 to 25000 blue whales swim in the oceans of the world.

45 For free distribution

ElephantsElephants, world’s largest animals on land are now listed as endangered. The Asian elephant, which lives in South and Southeast Asia, is threatened due to high human population in the region. Forests are decreased day by day due to the clearance of land for settlements, agriculture and development projects. The African elephant is endangered mainly due to poaching for ivory.

i) Read the descriptions and complete the table.

Name of the animalHabitat(Where it lives)

The reason for it being

endangered

ii) Match the words with their meanings.

1. Global warming a. threatened with extinction 2. Natural habitat b. no longer existing or living

3. Extinct c. the illegal hunting, killing and capturing wild animals 4. Endangered d. the natural environment in which a group of species lives5. Poaching c. the increase of the earth's average surface temperature due to the effect of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide

For free distribution46

Capitalization

■ The first letter of a sentence

e.g. Lions are endangered animals.

■ Names of people and places

e.g. Weerasinghe, Radhika, Diyathalawa, Canada, Asia

■ Pronoun “I”

e.g. Where did I put my spectacles?

■ The days of the week and months of the year

Sunday, January

■ Titles

e.g. Mr., Dr., Mrs., Ms.

■ The first letter of a sentence that is a direct quote

e.g. The interviewer asked, “Should we stop using polythene?”

■ Names of bodies of water

e.g. Indian Ocean, The Nile

■ Names of the planets

e.g. Mars, Jupiter, Earth

■ Names of nationalities, languages and religions

e.g. Indians, English, Buddhism, Christianity

■ Names of government bodies

e.g. Municipal Council

Revision point

Activity 12

Rewrite the following essay with correct capitalization.

flying kites is a favourite pastime of mine. not only is it enjoyable and exciting, it is also an environmentally friendly recreational activity. it takes us out of doors into the fresh air as well.

47 For free distribution

every year in july and in august my friends udaya, rishan and i go to panadura beach to fly kites. we make kites of various shapes and sizes. udaya’s uncle, mr. perera always helps us with our work. he is very good at making kites.apart from flying kites, we enjoy looking at kites. it is so exciting to see many colourful kites fluttering in the sky. we usually select sundays because that’s when you can see the most beautiful collection. rishan says that the chinese believe that looking up at a kite improves your eyesight.i think we are fortunate that sri lanka is an island surrounded by the indian ocean. that is why we have a plenty of wind to fly kites.

Activity 13

Capitalization Practice

Rewrite the sentences using capitals where necessary.

1. scientists have not yet found out if mars holds favourable climatic conditions to support life on it.2. the municipal council takes our garbage to recycling centres every saturday. 3. the river nile originates in east africa, flows through many countries including ethiopia and egypt, and empties its water into the mediterranean sea.

Activity 14

Writing

Write an essay titled “Let's Protect Our Environment”.

Activity 15

Group Work

Speaking

Discuss the statement given below. Engage in a debate.

‘‘It is possible to achieve development without harming the environment,,.

For free distribution48

5BEST USE OF TIME

Activity 1

Speaking

Read the following sayings.

1 2 3

4

5

a) Do you agree with these sayings?

b) Discuss with your partner and find the message conveyed by them.

49 For free distribution

Activity 2

Act out

Rajan : Hey, Samith! Where are you going in such a hurry?

Samith : We are late for cricket practices. If we hurry up, we can be there on

time.

Hassan : Take it easy. We are also going there.

Rajan : Yes, we needn’t run. Most of our friends will be late today.

Samith : Can’t you remember the cricket scholarship?

Rajan : Oh, no! I completely forgot that. But not to worry, we’ll be late only

by a few minutes.

Samith : But, it’ll matter. Remember that the early bird catches the worm.

Rajan : Alright, carry on. You can be the early bird. We’ll come slowly.

Hassan : Yes, we’ll see you there.

Samith : Bye, see you.

Activity 3

Speaking / Writing

Work in groups and discuss the advantages of working on time. List them out.

Activity 4

Listening

Samith was on time for cricket practices. There were only 6 students. The master in-charge of cricket introduced a special guest who was a representative from the Minstry of Education. He briefed them about the cricket scholarship. Samith listened to him attentively and jotted down the important points.

For free distribution50

1. Number of scholarships offered:

2. Number of areas to be completed in the application:

3. Where to paste the photograph:

4. Age limit:

5. Tests to be faced by the applicants:

6. Duration of the scholarship:

7. Facilities:

8. Monthly allowance of the scholarship:

Activity 5

Hassan and Rajan came late. They were looking for Samith. They saw some other friends writing something. Complete their conversation using the phrases given.

Hassan : Hey, Kishan, have you seen Samith?Kishan : ………………………………….. Rajan : What is he doing there?Sadeesh : ………………………………………………………………Hassan : Oh, what are you doing?Kishan : ………………………………………………………………Rajan : An application form? What is it for?Dilan : ………………………………………………................…… Hassan : Where can we also get one?Kishan : …………………………………………………....................Rajan : I hope we are not late.

- We’re filling in an application form. - From the representative.- He must be in the pavilion.- It’s for a cricket scholarship to Australia.- He’s speaking to the representative from the Ministry of Education.

51 For free distribution

Read aloud

When Hassan and Rajan met the master in-charge, he showed them the following poem which was pasted on the wall of the staff room.

TIME

To realize the value of one year:Ask a student who has failed a final exam.

To realize the value of one month:Ask a mother who has given birth to a premature baby.

To realize the value of one week: Ask an editor of a weekly newspaper.

To realize the value of one hour: Ask a diver who dives with an Oxygen cylinder.

To realize the value of one minute: Ask the person who has missed a train, bus or plane.

To realize the value of one second:Ask a person who has survived an accident.

To realize the value of one millisecond:Ask the person who has won a silver medal in the Olympics.

Time waits for no one.Treasure every moment you have.

You will treasure it even more whenyou can share it with someone special.

~Author Unknown~

For free distribution52

Activity 6

Writing

Complete the table following the example given.

Time lostWho would know the value of it?

e.g.: One yeara student who has failed a final exam.

b) What is the message given in the poem?

Activity 7

Writing

Hassan and Rajan apologized to their master-in-charge for being late.Write the conversation they had with the master in-charge. Include their excuse and the master -in-charge’s advice.

53 For free distribution

Activity 8

Writing

Study the following newspaper advertisement.

VACANCY

Gajaba Sports Club is looking for a cricket coach for the senior cricket team with following qualifications. - Should possess more than 10 years of experience in a similar capacity. - Should be an energetic person with a proven track record. He will be paid an attractive remuneration.

Walk-in interviews every weekday from 8 a.m to 2 p.m at Gajaba Sports Complex building.

Call Mihira – 0178255944 or email: gajaba.club@schoolmail.com for more information.

Secretary Gajaba Sports Club

Imagine that you are a cricket coach who wishes to apply for the post advertised. Write an email to the Secretary of the Gajaba Sports Club asking for more details (working hours, days and other facilities given). You may use the given format.

For free distribution54

gajaba.club@schoolmail.com

cricket coach

Dear Sir,

This is with regard to the advertisement which appeared in

the......

Activity 9

Writing

Read the following article and answer the questions that follow.

Anyone who prepares for an exam will have to plan and study according to a timetable. What is the best time of the day to study? For some, it is the daytime and for some others it’s at night. However, there are some students who struggle to find a suitable time to study due to many reasons.

After a good night's sleep, people tend to have more energy and become more active during the day. Since most of the people are contactable during the day, it is easy to communicate with teachers, friends and others to clarify any questions that you may have. Furthermore, the natural light you get during the day is better than the artificial light that you use at night.

55 For free distribution

On the other hand, studying during the night can also be beneficial. During the night, the environment is very quiet. This creates a setting to study peacefully. Hence, there are fewer distractions than the day time. When you study during the night, your creativity will increase and this in turn will help you to understand theories and concepts easily. Your analysing ability also will be greater.

However, the best time to study depends on an individual's personality, nature of the exam, time management, the natural sleep cycle of the person, the resources the person has etc.

Whatever the time you choose to study, it is important to be methodical. First, set a target and keep on recalling your target. Next, give yourself enough time to study and organize your study space. It will also be advantageous to work according to a timetable, use flow charts and diagrams to concentrate on daily lessons, practise past question papers, discuss your answers with others, get necessary clarifications from teachers, organize study groups and associate with friends who have a spirit to study. You should not forget to take regular breaks, eat nutritious food, drink plenty of water and spend time with your family too. Above all, be positive and have faith in yourself. Then, no one can stop you from achieving your target.

A) Complete the table given below on advantages of studying during daytime/night.

Advantages of studying during the daytime

Advantages of studying during the night

B) a) What are the steps you have to follow when studying?b) What time of the day do you study? Why?c) Give a suitable title to the article.

For free distribution56

Activity 10

Writing

Study the following pie chart. It shows the percentage of time spent on different

activities by a Grade 11 student. Write a description about the chart. The phrases

given may help you.

Lowest percentage .....

Highest percentage....

Equal amount (of)....

More time.....

Less time.....

57 For free distribution

Suffixes

We can change the word class of certain words with the use of suffixes.

Example: ■ slow (adj.) slowly (adv.) ■ usual (adj.) usually (adv.)

■ rare (adj.)  rarely (adv.)

■ play (v.)  playful (adj.)

■ appear (v.)  appearance (n.)

Revision point

Activity 11

Complete the table following the example. You may use a dictionary.

appreciate, calculate, admire, desire, move, tolerate, economy, care, beauty,

wonder, fashion, honour, accept, capital, lazy

Noun Verb Adjective Adverb

e.g.: acceptance acceptability

acceptacceptableunacceptably

For free distribution58

Activity 12

Use the correct form of the word in brackets to complete the following story.

One day Mithun …… (want) to see a dentist to get a tooth extracted. He …… (make) an appointment with the dentist. Mithun was ….. (give) a date and a time. So he ….. (keep) on recalling the date and time. But, he …. (be) unsure about the time. However, on the day of the ..........(appoint), Mithun went to see the dentist. When he ….. (enter) the clinic, a lady greeted him ……. (warm) and talked to him …… (polite). She …. (ask) for his details and …. (give) him an appointment number. Mithun put it ….. (careful) into his pocket and waited …… (patient). He ….. (check) the number several times. His number … (be) 6 and he entered the room … (quick) when it …. (be) his turn. In the room, there …. (be) two nurses and both were … (wear) masks and it was difficult to identify them. Nobody ..… (utter) a word. Mithun was …. (direct) to a chair. What happened next?

Continue this story and write a suitable ending.

Activity 13

Match the following idioms with their meanings.

Example: A month of Sundays – a very long period of time

1. Better late than never To go back to the past

2. Beat the clock Being old fashioned

3. Turn back the hands of time The top level of a profession

4. Behind the times Succeed in something before time is up 5. The big time Better to do something late than not do it at all

59 For free distribution

6A MOMENT OF FUN

Activity 1

Act out

Let’s Watch a Drama

Minuri : Hi! Where are you going? What’s in that box you are carrying?Rizna : We are preparing for the drama competition. I’m taking some costumes for the actors.Minuri : What drama competition? Is your class organizing one?Rizna : No, not our class. It’s the annual Inter-House Drama Competition. The English Literary Association is organizing it. They conduct it every year.Minuri : Of course. Will there be many dramas?Rizna : There will be four dramas-one from each house.Minuri : What's the drama your house is performing?Rizna : “The Caucasian Chalk Circle” by the German playwright Bertolt Brecht.Minuri : How about the other houses?Rizna : One house is doing “The Christmas Carol.”Another ‘The Merchant of Venice.” I think your house is performing “Everyman.”Minuri : I have read that play. Are you also acting?Rizna : Yes, of course.Minuri : Which character are you?Rizna : I’m Grusha, one of the main characters in the play. All the students are invited. Don’t forget to come.Minuri : Definitely. I’d love to see it.Rizna : Well, I have to go. The others have been practising since 8 o’clock.Minuri : Okay. If you need any help with the preparations, please let me know.Rizna : I sure will. Thanks.

For free distribution60

Activity 2

Writing

Answer these questions.

• What is Rizna preparing for?

• What is in Rizna's box?

• Who is organizing the drama competition?

• How many dramas will be staged? List them out.

• What character is Rizna going to play?

Determiners

Note the following underlined words.

■ What’s that box you are carrying?

■ We are preparing for the drama competition.

■ We are going to have four dramas.

■ Is your class organizing one?

■ It’s a play by the German playwright Bertolt Brecht.

The words underlined in the above sentences function as determiners. A determiner is used to modify a noun. They tell us whether the noun phrase refers to someone/something specific or general.

e.g. Noun phrase – that bundle a play ↑ ↑ Determiner (specific) determiner (general)

Revision point

61 For free distribution

Examples of determiners are:

■ the, a, an

■ this, that, these, those

■ my, our, your, his, her, its, their

■ one, two ……

■ which, what, whose

■ some, any, few ,a little, much, many, more, most, several, all, half….

■ each, every

Activity 3

Writing

Copy these sentences into your book and underline the determiners.

• The vacation we spent in Nuwara Eliya was wonderful.

• My uncle works in that factory.

• She is the lady I saw at the village market yesterday.

• Mr. Sumanasena can speak many languages.

• Which house is yours?

• This work is very easy. Any child can do it.

For free distribution62

Activity 4

Writing

Complete the sentences using the given determiners.

• There are ………………..books on agriculture in the library. I am sure you can find what you need.• I would like …………. glass of milk, please. • Aren’t there ………. mangoes in the basket?• Only ………………. seats are available for the show.• She brought …………… little brother to the concert.

anymanyherwhicha fewthesea

The Present Tense

The Simple Present Tense - For habitual actions e.g: They conduct the drama competition every year.

Revision point

63 For free distribution

The Present Continuous Tense - For an action happening at the moment of speaking e.g: I’m taking some costumes for the actors. - For an action happening at present but not necessarily at the moment of speaking e.g: We are preparing for the drama competition.

The Present Perfect Tense - For past actions which are connected or relevent to the present in some way. The exact time of the action is not usually mentioned. e.g: I have read that play.

The Present Perfect Continuous Tense - For actions that began in the past and are still continuing. e.g: The others have been practising since 8 o’ clock.

Activity 5

Writing

Complete the sentences using the above tenses.

1 A: Have you been to Trincomalee? B: No, I………………………….. (not). How long ………… it usually .....………….. (take) to get there by bus?2. You …………. ……………….. …………… (study) since early morning. Please take a rest.3. Thisuri is a good friend of mine. I ....................(know) her since childhood.

4. I …………… …………….. (go) to the library. Would you like to come with me?5. The southwest monsoon usually……………….. (bring) a lot of rain.

6. My brother ……………. (study) hard for an examination these days.

For free distribution64

Activity 6

Writing

Jerome saw this notice on the school noticeboard. Read it and complete the information sheet.

Would you like to take part in the Inter-house Drama Competition?

Then, come join us!

We are casting for : Everyman The Caucasian Chalk Circle The Merchant of Venice The Christmas Carol

Auditions will be held on Friday 20th September at 2 p.m. at the school Main Hall.

Secretary English Literary Association

AUDITIONS

This notice is about: ………………………………………...........…….......….

Date: …………………………………………….........……...........…………...

Time: ……………………………………………….......……...............………

Place: …………………………………………………..................…………...

65 For free distribution

Activity 7

Writing

Jerome’s friend Faruk likes acting but he is absent today. Imagine you are

Jerome and write a note to Faruk informing him about the auditions.

Activity 8

Writing

Prepare a notice for any one of the following.

• Calling for new members for the school band/choir.

• Calling for new members for the school dance troupe.

Activity 9

Reading

Forms of Entertainment

Entertainment is a performance or an activity that provides enjoyment to an audience.There are many forms of entertainment. Among them, films, dramas, music, dancing and opera are the most popular. All of these are art forms in which the medium of expression is different.

A drama is a piece of writing that tells a story and is meant for performance. Originally, dramas were meant to be acted on stage before a live audience.Radio and television dramas were later developments.

A film is a similar art form,where a series of images creates the illusion of continuous movement on a screen. Both dramas and films provide an audio-visual realistic experience to spectators who often tend to identify themselves with the characters.

For free distribution66

Music is another popular form of entertainment. Music is considered “the universal language of mankind”. That is because a piece of music has the ability to appeal to listeners who are not even familiar with its language or the culture. That is why some musicians are famous all over the world even though their fans may not understand the language in which they sing.

The rhythmic movement of the body and feet to music is called dancing. Dancing exists in all cultures in different forms and styles.

Opera is an art form in which music, singing, drama, poetry and dancing are all combined together. Opera can be defined as musical drama. This is a classical form of entertainment preferred mostly by adults.

People need to engage in enjoyable activities in order to balance their busy lives. Entertainment helps people to become relaxed. At the same time, it is not good to spend too much time on entertainment.We may become addicted to it and neglect important things such as education or work. Maintaining a proper balance between work and pleasure will help us to lead a productive life.

1) Read the above article and complete the following sentences.

• Some examples for different forms of entertainment are ………………………

• Both dramas and films provide ……………………………………....…..……

• Entertainment helps people to ………………………………………......…….

• Spending too much time on entertainment could ………………………....….

2) Find definitions for the following words from the text.

entertainment, drama, film/movie, dancing

67 For free distribution

Activity 10

Writing

Read these words aloud. Select and write words for each group.

electrician, nation, beautician, election, politician, addition, expression,

passion, profession, discussion, decision, condition, magician, mention,

optician, technician, admission, accommodation, promotion, description,

occasion, commission, session, mathematician, permission, illusion

-sion-ssion-tion-cian

e.g.: TelevisionExpressionEducationMusician

For free distribution68

Activity 11

Reading

Read the poem and answer the questions.

PoemLeisure

What is this life if, full of care,We have no time to stand and stare?

No time to stand beneath the boughs,And stare as long as sheep and cows:

No time to see, when woods we pass,Where squirrels hide their nuts in grass:

No time to see, in broad daylight,Streams full of stars, like skies at night:

No time to turn at Beauty's glance,And watch her feet, how they can dance:

No time to wait till her mouth canEnrich that smile her eyes began?

A poor life this if, full of care,We have no time to stand and stare.

W. H. Davies

1.“Stand and stare” in line 2 means:

a. relax and look around us. b. do nothing. c. stand in one place. d. stare at something.

69 For free distribution

2. According to the poet, why can’t we see where squirrels hide nuts? Because …

a. they run away when they see us. b. we are too busy to stop and enjoy the beauty of nature. c. we dislike animals. d. there are no squirrels in the woods.

3. “Streams full of stars; like skies at midnight” means:

a. stars are reflected in the streams at midnight. b. when the rays of the sun fall on the streams,the stones beneath glitter like stars in the sky. c. stones in the streams in the area are shaped like stars. d. shooting stars fall into the streams at night. 4. Which of these is not a theme of this poem?

a. the importance of leisure. b. relaxing and appreciating nature. c. the beauty of nature d. idling and wasting time.

5.Find the rhyming words in the poem.

6. This poem creates a lot of images in our mind. What are they? e.g.: stand under the branches of green trees

7. Read the given explanations and answer the questions based on the poem.

For free distribution70

Stanza: A group of lines in poetry that forms a smaller unit by themselves.

Some examples for stanzas: • Couplet : a stanza with two rhyming lines. • Quatrain : a stanza with four lines that may or may not rhyme.

Repetition : repeating a word, phrase, line or stanza to draw attention to an idea.

Simile : an expression that compares two different things showing similarities.

a. How many stanzas are there in this poem?b. What type of stanzas are they?c. Are there any similes used in this poem? What are they?d. Is repetition used in this poem? Show some examples.

Activity 12

Speaking

Practise this conversation with your friend.

Mrs.Ganeshan phoned ‘Star Cinema,’ a movie theatre to book some tickets to watch a film.

Ticket Clerk : Good evening, Star Theatre.Mrs. Ganeshan : Good evening, can I reserve some tickets for the 2.30 show of "The Mountain Adventures"on the 10th?Ticket Clerk : I’m sorry, madam. They are all sold out.Mrs. Ganeshan : Is that so? Do you have any tickets available for the other shows?Ticket Clerk : Yes, madam. There are tickets available for the 4.30 and 6.30 shows.Mrs. Ganeshan : That’s great. Could you tell me the prices please?Ticket Clerk : Certainly. Balcony tickets are 300 rupees. The others are priced at 150 and 250 rupees.

71 For free distribution

Mrs. Ganeshan : Is there a booking fee?Ticket Clerk : No, madam.Mrs. Ganeshan : I’d like to book four 250 rupee tickets.Ticket Clerk : May I know your name please?Mrs. Ganeshan : Ganeshan. G. A. N. E. S. H. A. N.Ticket Clerk : How would you like to pay? In cash or by credit card?Mrs. Ganeshan : In cash. Can I pay when I collect the tickets?Ticket Clerk : Yes, madam. Please purchase your tickets before 5.30 p.m. otherwise this booking will be cancelled.Mrs. Ganeshan : I understand. Thank you.Ticket Clerk : You're welcome. Have a nice day!

Activity 13

Listening

Write numbers from 1 to 6 in your exercise book.Your teacher will read out 6 sentences based on the above telephone conversation. Listen to them and mark them true (T) or false (F).

Activity 14

Group Work

Write a telephone conversation for one of these situations. Present it to the class.

• To reserve train tickets.• To make an appointment to visit the planetarium during your trip to Colombo. • To make an appointment to see a doctor/dentist.• To reserve tickets to see a musical programme.

For free distribution72

Masculine and Feminine Nouns

Grammatical gender is a system of noun classification. Masculine nouns are words for men, boys and male animals. Feminine nouns are words for women, girls and female animals. There are nouns that do not fall into the above two categories. They are gender neutral.

Revision point

Activity 15

Fill in the table with the correct noun.

god, lass, empress, grandchild, stallion, toddler, ram, lad, goddess, duke, wizard,

heir, emperor, steward, ewe, landlord, mare, heiress, witch, landlady, duchess,

stewardess

Masculine FormFeminine FormGender Neutral

73 For free distribution

7 SIMPLE LIVING

Activity 1

Speaking /Writing

Look at the following pictures. Write an instruction for each picture. Follow the example given.

abc

ed

e.g: (a) Don't eat junk food

.

For free distribution74

Activity 2

Listening

1. Shashi is a ………… year-old boy. a) 15 b) 16 c) 17 d) 18

2. He is the ………… in the family. a) only child b) youngest c) eldest d) middle child

3. Shashi’s father is a ……….. a) Supervisor b) Security Guard c) Security Officer d) Office Assistant

4. Shashi’s mother is an/a…………. a) Representative b) Office Assistant c) Executive d) Manager

5. Shashi’s sister is ………… years old. a) 12 b) 13 c) 14 d) 15

6. The radio announcement was about a............... a) water cut b) power cut c) bus strike d) train strike

75 For free distribution

Activity 3

Writing

,Write a paragraph on what you and your family did last weekend.

Activity 4

Act out

Rashmika : Here! I’ve got a bunch of grapes to share with you. Anuradha : Thanks. Rashmika : You seem worried. Is anything wrong?Anuradha : You know it’s not always good to be the youngest in a family. Rashmika : Why is that?Anuradha : Because I always get hand-me-downs and what my brother has used. Rashmika : So, what's wrong with that?Anuradha : I don’t get anything new.Rashmika : Don’t say that, Anuradha. Our parents always try to give us the best.Anuradha : Yes. It’s true for my brother, but not for me. I have to use his cricket gear. Remember the pile of story books I have? I got them from my brother. Rashmika : Oh really? But your collection of books is the best among ours.Anuradha : But they were passed down to me after my brother used them.Rashmika : Come on, my friend. Don’t worry. Even I use my brother’s box of mathematical instruments and his old school bag.Anuradha : No, Rashmika, I don’t like it. I am so upset.Rashmika : Hey, be cool. Come, I’ll show you an interesting article.Anuradha : Alright.

For free distribution76

Activity 5

Vocabulary

Form collective nouns using the words in the two boxes.

directors bees sticks

elephants flowers newspapers

wolves players

birds

bunch flock herd

pack swarm team

pile board

bundle

Activity 6

Writing

Complete the following grid.

Collective Nouns

People Animal Others

A group of men

A team of players

A gang of thieves

A panel of .....................

A regiment of ...............

......................................

A flock of birds

A hive of bees

A pack of wolves

A herd of ........................

......................................

.......................................

A stack of wood

A fleet of ships

A group of .....................

A bunch .........................

A chest of .....................

......................................

77 For free distribution

Activity 7

Writing

Complete the following collective nouns. ■ A bouquet of .......................................... ■ A sheaf of ............................................... ■ The band of ............................................ ■ A team of ............................................... ■ A string of .................................... ■ Three bouquets of .................................. ■ Sheaves of .............................................. ■ The bands of .......................................... Activity 8

Reading

Read and answer.

Given below is the article shown to Anuradha by Rashmika.

When we study the history of the world, we can see that many religious leaders, political leaders and social activists lived simple lives as minimalists. This quality attracted many disciples and followers around the world.

Mahathma Gandhi is considered as the Father of the Nation by the Indians. He was an inspiring philosopher and a leader who led a simple life. Gandhi was actually born into an affluent family and had a very privileged upbringing. Gandhi accumulated little, ate the amount he needed to eat, dressed simply and led a simple stress free life. He was a man who believed in being non-possessive and didn’t even own a house. When Gandhi died, he had less than ten personal possessions including a watch, a pair

For free distribution78

of spectacles, a pair of sandals and his eating bowl. Although some considered him to have died a pauper, he influenced the lives of many. Even today his way of life continues to inspire many others around the world. However, at present it is believed to be difficult to minimise the living conditions to such an extent. One must learn to use, buy, or do things that they really ought to do rather than doing them just because the others do.

Life becomes easy when one learns to reuse, recycle and give things away. Self-sufficiency also is a good trait of a person who leads a simple life. If one can manage his own work such as painting one’s room, clearing the garden or mending a shoe etc, it makes life easier. In addition if one is in the habit of growing fruits and vegetables for one's own

consumption, that person saves a lot of money for a worthy cause. A person who leads a simple life is stress free and has the opportunity to live a life that is inspired or inspiring.

1) State whether the following are TRUE (T) or FALSE (F) according to the text. a) Minimalists live a simple life. b) Mahathma Gandhi was born into a poor family. c) Gandhi had only ten things of his own when he died.d) Self-sufficiency is a trait of simple life.

2) Find similar words/phrases from the text for the following. a) Wealthy b) Collected c) Gains

3) Find opposites for the following. a) Easy b) Complex c) Maximise

79 For free distribution

4) Give a suitable title to the text.

5) What are the good practices of a simple life style? Discuss and list them out.

6) Write a speech on the value of leading a simple life and present it to the class.

Activity 9

Reading / Writing

Read aloud the following text and do the activities that follow.

The Last Wishes of Alexander the GreatT

he name of Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.) still lives in the legends of the East, and traces of his swift conquest are still stamped upon the fabric of Western Asia. His name is famous as a conqueror and as the King of Macedonia. Alexander the Great was born in the Pella region of Macedonia on July 20, 356 B.C., to King Philip II of Macedon and Queen Olympia. This young, dark-eyed and curly-haired prince was tutored by the great philosopher, Aristotle. Alexander the Great conquered half the known world in thirteen years. This ruler swept aside the mighty armies of the Persian Empire and established his rule as far as Punjab. Alexander the Great was far more than a general and a leader of armies. His colossal victories were followed by sympathetic, understanding administration and had won the loyalty of the defeated. Alexander, after conquering many kingdoms, was returning home. On the way, he fell ill. Knowing that his death was nearing, he longed to see his mother’s face. However, he realized that his sinking health would not permit him to reach his mother as he was far from his homeland. Alexander the great realized that all his wealth and his conquests, his great army, his sharp sword would not help him to save his life.

He called his generals and said, "I will depart from this world soon, I have three

For free distribution80

wishes, please carry them out without fail."With tears flowing down their cheeks, the generals agreed to abide by their king's last wishes.

1) "My first desire is that", said Alexander, "my physicians alone must carry my coffin."

2) After a pause, he continued, "Secondly, I desire that when my coffin is being carried to the grave, the path leading to the graveyard be strewn with gold, silver and precious stones which I have collected in my treasury".

3) The king felt exhausted after saying this. He took a minute's rest and continued. "My third and last wish is that both my hands be kept dangling out of my coffin".

All who were around were in tears. But, there was none who was brave enough to inquire the reasons for the wishes except for the favourite general. As a reply this great ruler said, “I would like the world to know of the three lessons I have just learnt. I want my physicians to carry my coffin because people should realize that no doctor on this earth can really cure anybody. They are powerless and cannot save a person from the clutches of death. So let not people take life for granted. The second wish of strewing gold, silver and other riches on the path to the graveyard is to tell people that not even a fraction of gold will come with me. I spent all my life in greed for power, earning riches but I cannot take anything with me. Let people realize that it is a sheer waste of time to chase wealth. About my third wish of having my hands dangling out of the coffin, I wish people to know that I came empty handed into this world and empty handed I go out of this world".

Leaving these three important lessons, this great conqueror let death conquer him.

81 For free distribution

1. Complete the following chart.

ALEXANDER THE GREAT

Birth Year

MotherFather

Country ruled

Conquered area

DeathThree wishes

2. Find synonyms for the following from the text. a. Medical practitioner b. A box in which the dead body is placed/burried/cremated c. Hanging d. A person who takes possession of land by force e. Funds of the government f. A wise person who has specialized philosophy

3. Pronounce the following words.

d) Physiciane) Coffinf) Treasury

g) Conquerorh) Sympathyi) Cure

a) Philosopher b) Practitionerc) Physics 4. Answer the following.

For free distribution82

i.Do you consider King Alexander the Great as a great king? Why?

ii.What is the lesson you learn from this great king?

iii.Find more information about Alexander the Great and some other

leaders. Write a composition on the title “What we can learn from great

personalities”.

Activity 10

Act out

Manjitha : Hey, Kavindu! Why are you in a bad mood?Kavindu : Today, I have to do everything all by myself.Riyaz : Why is that?Kavindu : Both my mother and father left home early in the morning.Manjitha : Wait! Today is Sunday! Do they go to work during the weekend too?Kavindu : No, they had to go to see my grandfather.Riyaz : What’s wrong with him?Kavindu : He's had a fall. It happened last night.Manjitha : Oh! I’m sorry.Kavindu : I have to take care of everything at home.Riyaz : Don’t worry, my friend. We’ll help you.Kavindu : There will be some visitors too.Manjitha : So, we’ll get together and arrange something for them.Riyaz : Yes. Kavindu : Give me five minutes. I’ll make tea for you.Manjitha : No thanks. We've just had some tea. Let’s prepare something for the visitors.

83 For free distribution

Activity 11

Speaking

Answer these questions orally.

1. Why was Kavindu in a bad mood?

2. Who visited him?

3. What had happened to Kavindu’s grandfather?

4. Did Kavindu prepare tea for his friends? Why?

5. What were they going to do next?

Activity 12

Grammar

Read the text aloud, paying special attention to the highlighted phrases.

One evening Kavindu’s parents received a call from his aunt. It was bad news.

Kavindu’s grandfather had had a fall. His aunt had taken him to the doctor

and the doctor had prescribed a cast. Kavindu’s parents decided to visit him.

Kavindu and his sister agreed to stay at home.

The following morning, when the children got up, their parents had left for

the hospital. Kavindu, the eldest, had to take care of his little sister. When

the sister got up, Kavindu had already got up, and had prepared their bed

tea. He had had his and had put his sister’s into the flask. When Kavindu’s

friends arrived, he had already dusted the furniture and had swept the house.

Kavindu’s friends had come to invite him to a party but they all decided to stay

with Kavindu until his parents came home.

For free distribution84

Past Perfect Tense

• Kavindu’s parents left home at 5.00 o’clock. • Kavindu got up at 6.00 o’clock. When Kavindu got up, his parents had left home.

Revision point

Activity 13

Writing

Construct sentences using the words in brackets.

1 Kavindu’s parents were not at home when Manjitha and Riyaz arrived.

(they / already / left )

2. Kavindu invited his friends for tea.

( but / they / already / had / tea / Manjitha’s place)

3. Kavindu wanted to send a book to grandfather.

(but / parents / left / when / he / got up)

4. Kavindu’s sister wanted to help her brother.

( he / done everything/ she / got up)

5. When Kavindu’s parents returned home,

( Kavindu and friends / already / prepared / dinner)

85 For free distribution

Reported Speech

Direct Speech Reported Speech Simple Past Past Perfect / Simple Past Present Perfect Past Perfect

Revision point

Activity 14

Writing

Report what Kavindu said to his friends.

I dusted the furniture.

My sister got up.

I prepared tea for her.

My parents have gone to see my grandfather.

My mother has left a note for me.

1. Kavindu said that ........................................................

2. ......................................................................................

Report what Kavindu’s friends asked.

For free distribution86

Why did you call us?

Why did you stay at home?

Manjitha

Why did they leave so early?

Why did you do everything alone? Riyaz

1. Manjitha asked Kavindu why he had called them.2. .......................................................................................................................3 ........................................................................................................................ 4 ........................................................................................................................

Activity 15

Vocabulary

The following pictures show different actions. Copy the list of verbs into your writing book and match them with the given pictures. Write the number of the picture against the verb.

■ sift / sieve■ dice■ slice■ fry■ knead■ mix

■ stir■ grind■ squeeze

■ peel■ scrape ■ chop■ boil■ add■ beat■ simmer■ drain■ pound

87 For free distribution

1234

181920

161514

17

13

1211109

8765

For free distribution88

Mother calls home.

Mother : Hello, son!Kavindu : Hello, mother. How’s grandfather?Mother : He's alright now but we’ll get late to come.Kavindu : Oh, I see.Mother : I was worried about you and your sister.Kavindu : We're fine. My friends are here. We've been cooking.Mother : Oh son, that’s great! Kavindu : We've already cooked rice and made a coconut sambol.Mother : You can make a dhal curry too.Kavindu : Can you quickly give us the instructions? I’ll put the phone on the speaker.Mother : That’s good.Kavindu : Tell us, mother.Mother : Alright, here we go. First, scrape the coconut. Then ...

Activity 16

Group Work

Discuss and continue the list of instructions given by Kavindu's mother.

Activity 17

Writing

Refer to the pictures given above on actions related to cooking and complete the table given below.

Using imperatives for InstructionsInstruction in passive formDice the vegetablesFirst, the vegetables are dicedBoil waterBoiled potatoes are smashed

89 For free distribution

Activity 18

Writing

Four pupils who obtained best results at an examination got the opportunity to go on a wonderful journey, a journey to Simplicity.

Following notices were displayed at the entrance.

Eco-friendly vehicles only.

Nature lovers are welcome!

No polythene!

No excessive stuff!

Imagine that you are one of the pupils who went on the journey and build up a story. Give an interesting start and an ending to your story. Include the following. • What did you bring with you? • What did you see and did there? • People / animals / special creatures you met. • What did you feel?

For free distribution90

8 READING IS FUN

Reading

Robinson Crusoe has captured the imagination of countless readers with the story of one man’s survival on a remote island far from civilization. The book is thought to be one of the first English novels but it is a timeless story of a merchant’s trading voyages and adventures at sea.

Read the extract taken from it and do the activities that follow.

Daniel Defoe was born in 1660 in London, England. He became a merchant and participated in several businesses. He was also a prolific political pamphleteer. Late in life he turned his pen to fiction and wrote Robinson Crusoe, one of the most widely read and influential novels of all time. Defoe died in 1731.

91 For free distribution

My thoughts were now wholly employed about securing myself against either savages, if any should appear, or wild beasts, if any were in the island; and I had many thoughts of the method how to do this, and what kind of dwelling to make - whether I should make me a cave in the earth, or a tent upon the earth; and, in short, I resolved upon both; the manner and description of which, it may not be improper to give an account of.

I soon found the place I was in was not fit for my settlement, because it was upon a low, moorish ground, near the sea, and I believed it would not be wholesome, and more particularly because there was no fresh water near it; so I resolved to find a more healthy and more convenient spot of ground.

I consulted several things in my situation, which I found would be proper for me: first, health and fresh water, I just now mentioned; secondly, shelter from the heat of the sun; thirdly, security from ravenous creatures, whether man or beast;

fourthly, a view to the sea, that if God sent any ship in sight, I might not lose any advantage for my deliverance, of which I was not willing to banish all my expectation yet.

In search of a place proper for this, I found a little plain on the side of a rising hill, whose front towards this little plain was steep as a house-side, so that nothing could come down upon me from the top. On the one side of the rock there was a hollow place, worn a little way in, like the entrance or door of a cave but there was not really any cave or way into the rock at all.

For free distribution92

Activity 1

1) Indicate whether the following sentences are TRUE or FALSE.

1. Robinson Crusoe was concerned about his security in the remote island.

2. He was not sure whether there were wild animals in the island.

3. He found the place he was already in, suitable for his settlement.

4. He had fresh water where he already lived.

5. He wanted a view to the sea in the new place he was going to settle in.

2) Answer the following questions.

1. Against what did Robinson Crusoe want to secure himself?2. What kind of a place did he plan to make for him to live?3. Why was the place he was in, not good for him to live?4. Name two things he considered before selecting a good place to live.5. Briefly describe the place he found as a proper place for him to live.6. What do the following underlined words in the passage refer to?

a. this b. it

3) Note how the information is organized in the extract taken from Robinson Crusoe and reorder the following sentences.

This is what Crusoe did when he was shipwrecked on the island.

He assessed the conditions of the place he was already in.

He resolved to find a suitable place to live.

He decided on the conditions he needed in the new place.

He wanted to secure himself from savages and wild animals.

He decided on the right kind of dwelling.

He searched for a proper place and found one.

93 For free distribution

4) Crusoe thought of four things before selecting a place to settle. Write them down in the correct order.

e.g. - First, he made sure he could find fresh water easily.

5) Imagine your family is going to move to a new house. Write a paragraph describing things your family would pay attention to, before selecting a new house.

Begin like this:

First, we would like to find a house closer to the city.

Here is another equally famous book series children enjoy reading.

Sherlock Holmes is a fictional character created by Scottish author and physician Sir Arthur Conan Doyle.

Sir Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle was a Scottish writer and physician, most noted for his fictional stories about the detective Sherlock Holmes. These stories are generally considered milestones in the field of crime fiction.

This extract is taken from THE HOUND OF BASKERVILLES in the Sherlock Holmes series.

Read it and do the activities that follow.

For free distribution94

A terrible scream—a prolonged yell of horror and anguish—burst out of the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the blood to ice in my veins.“Oh, my God!” I gasped. “What is it? What does it mean?”

Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outline at the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrust forward, his face peering into the darkness.

“Hush!” he whispered. “Hush!”

The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had pealed out from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain. Now it burst upon our ears, nearer, louder, more urgent than before.

“Where is it?” Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of his voice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul.

“Where is it, Watson?”

“There, I think.” I pointed into the darkness.

“No, there!”

Again the agonized cry swept through the silent night, louder and much nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep, muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling like the low, constant murmur of the sea.

“The hound!” cried Holmes. “Come, Watson, come! Great heavens, if we are too late!”

He had started running swiftly over the moor, and I had followed at his heels.

But now from somewhere among the broken ground immediately in front of us there came one last despairing yell, and then a dull, heavy thud. We halted and listened. Not another sound broke the heavy silence of the windless night.

95 For free distribution

I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted. He stamped his feet upon the ground.

“He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late.”

“No, no, surely not!”

“Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes of abandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has happened, we’ll avenge him!”

Blindly we ran through the gloom, blundering against boulders, forcing our way through gorse bushes, panting up hills and rushing down slopes, heading always in the direction when those dreadful sounds had come.

At every rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, but the shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing moved upon its dreary face.

Activity 2

Guess what is meant by the highlighted phrases in their context and select the correct answer.

1. Turned the blood to ice a. felt very sick b. felt very frightened c. felt very cold

2. Man of iron a. a strong man b. a well-built man c. a blacksmith

3. Shaken to the soul a. shivering with cold b. very much shocked c. very much angry

For free distribution96

4. Beaten us a. hit us b. defeated us c. left us

5. Nothing moved upon its dreary face a. Everything was still in the dull moor b. There was silence in the moor c. Something with a dreary face moved in the moor

Activity 3

Writing

Let’s do an adjective game. Work in small groups and find the adjectives that are used in the text to describe the following nouns. Copy the phrases into your notebook. Find other adjectives that can be used to describe the given nouns.

e.g.- terrible scream

loud scream

scream, yell, cry, outline, plain, night, rumble, murmur, ground, thud, silence, night, sounds, face

Activity 4

Underline the adjective. Find its opposite from the box.

1. The clothes are clean.

2. The homework is hard.

3. The party is noisy.

97 For free distribution

4. The man is poor.

5. The lights are on.

6. The perfume is expensive.

7. The car is fast.

8. The ground is wet.

9. My brother is tall.

10. The weather is cold.

rich

off

silent

dirty

short

hot

inexpensive

slow

dry

easy

Activity 5

Reading

Read the paragraph about Anne Frank and answer the questions.A

nne Frank was a Jewish girl who had to go into hiding during World War II from the Nazis. Together with seven others she hid in a secret annex. After almost two years in hiding they were discovered and deported to concentration camps. Anne’s father, Otto Frank, was the only one of the eight people to survive. After her death Anne became world famous because of the diary she had written while in hiding.Anne Frank was born on 12 June 1929 in Frankfurt. The economic crisis, Hitler’s rise to power and growing anti-Semitism (hatred against Jews) put an end to the family’s carefree life. So, following what most of the Jews did, they decided to leave Germany to save their lives.

Anne and others in hiding stayed very quietly, they were often afraid and despite good and bad times, spent the time together. They were helped by the office workers Johannes Kleiman, Victor Kugler, Miep Gies and Bep Voskuijl, by Miep's husband Jan Gies and warehouse boss Johannes Voskuijl, Bep's father. These helpers arranged food, clothes and books for them.

For free distribution98

Shortly before going into hiding Anne received a diary for her birthday. She started writing straightaway and during her time in hiding she wrote about events in the secret annex, about herself and about humanity. Her diary was a great support and source of relief to her. On 4th of August 1944 the people in hiding were arrested. They were deported to Auschwitz. Immediately after the arrest Miep Gies and Bep Voskuijl rescued Anne's diary and papers that had been left behind in the secret annex. Despite intensive investigations it had never been clear how the hiding place had been discovered.

Today, people from all over the world learn of Anne Frank's story. Over the years Otto Frank answered thousands of letters from people who had read his daughter's diary. In 1960 the Anne Frank House became a museum. Otto Frank remained involved with the Anne Frank House and campaigns for human rights until his death in 1980.

1. Where was Anne Frank born?2. Why did Anne and her family members go into hiding?3. Where did they hide? Use your own words for the answer.4. Why was it impossible for Anne’s family to remain in their own country?5. What kind of a life did they lead in hiding?6. What did she write in her diary?7. Why was she attached so much to the diary?8. Why did Anne Frank become famous?9. Where was the family sent after they were arrested?

Activity 6

Complete with suitable adjectives.

1. The _____________elephant loved peanuts.2. The _____________sun melted the snow.3. Those____________ flowers are rare.

99 For free distribution

4. My ______________van is parked in front.5. The ______________iguana scampered across the fence.6. I love to pet _______________rabbits.7. Our neighbour has a _____________baby.8. Does _____________music hurt your ears?9. The ______________boy was lost.10. A ________________wind blew from the west.

Activity 7

Speaking

As the secretary of the Young Readers’ Club you want to buy new books for the library. Interview five students about their interests in reading and fill in the following grid. First introduce yourself.

e.g.- I’m ……………. and I’m the ……………….. of the ……………… I want to……………………………………………………………..

NAMEDumesha

AGE15 years

HOMETOWNKurulugama

HOBBY/HOBBIESReading, Collecting stamps

WHETHER HE/ SHELIKES READINGyes

FAVOURITE BOOKJane Eyre

FAVOURITE AUTHORCharlotte Bronte

For free distribution100

Activity 8

Writing

Now, write a letter to the Manager of a bookshop in your area inquiring whether the books mentioned in this unit are available for you to buy for your library.Include the following;

Names of the books

Names of the writers

Inquiry about the prices etc.

Activity 9

Listening

Copy the following sentences into your writing book.

Listen and underline the word that is stressed each time the sentences are read.Then match the underlined sentences with their meanings.

SENTENCES

1. I think we should read books.2. I think we should read books.3. I think we should read books.4. I think we should read books.5. I think we should read books.

MEANINGS

A. I strongly think that we should read. It is a must to read books.B. It is my idea that we should read books. I don’t know how others think.C. I think we should read books, not write them.D. I think it is us who should read books, not our parents.E. I think we should read books, not newspapers or magazines.

101 For free distribution

Conjunctions

Conjunctions are words used to connect clauses or sentences.

Because After And Unless But Until Or When While

Revision point

Activity 10

Fill in the blanks with a suitable conjunction.

(but, while, and, or, because)

1. Crusoe considered the threats that could come from man………………

beast.

2. He didn’t decide to stay near the sea ……………………… there wasn’t

any fresh water.

3. They heard the cry, louder ………………….. nearer.

4. Holmes were after him at a close distance …………………. the shadows

were thick.

5. ……………….they were in the hut, a scream was heard.

For free distribution102

9ENIGMA

Activity 1

Act out

Caller : Hello, can I speak to Annie Wun?

Operator : Yes, you can speak to me.

Caller : No, I want to speak to Annie Wun!

Operator : Yes I understand you want to speak to anyone. You can speak to

me. Who is this?

Caller : I’m Sam Wun. And I need to talk to Annie Wun! It’s urgent.

Operator : I know you are someone and you want to talk to anyone! But

what’s this urgent matter about?

Caller : Well… just tell my sister Annie Wun that our brother Noe Wun

was involved in an accident. Noe Wun was injured and now Noe

Wun is being sent to the hospital. Right now, my father, Avery

Wun is on his way to the hospital.

Operator : Look, if no one was injured and no one was sent to the

hospital, then the accident isn’t an urgent matter! You may find

this hilarious but I don’t have time for this!

Caller : You are so rude! Who are you?

Operator : I’m Saw Ree.

Caller : Yes! You should be sorry. Now give me your name!

Operator : That’s what I said. I’m Saw Ree.

103 For free distribution

Activity 2

1) Complete the chart given below.

OperatorCaller

BrotherSisterFather

2) What happened in this telephone conversation?

3) Imagine that you are going to make a similar call. Work in pairs. Use the

following clues and write a telephone conversation.

- Caller’s name is Who

- Operator’s name is Asking

For free distribution104

Activity 3

Reading/ Writing

Read the following text and answer the questions that follow.

What can you say about the pictures shown above? They are strange circles and patterns seen on farming areas/sites. These patterns are called “Crop Circles”. The circles are mostly found in the United Kingdom, but have spread to dozens of countries around the world during the past decades.

It is said that crop circles appear every week somewhere around the world. These circles are considered mysterious since the strange circles and patterns appear mysteriously overnight in farmers' fields, provoking puzzlement. These patterns almost always involve circles, rarely triangles, rectangles, or squares, though some designs contain straight or curved lines.

Nobody knows how they are made, who brought them to the farming fields. Some believe that this can be a creation of hoaxers. But, mysteriously this nocturnal act is reported to be insensitive to cameras. Besides, hoaxers who devote their time and effort required to design and create the crop circles are unlikely to carelessly leave obvious signs of their activities. Some believe that these patterns are made by aliens.

In 1966 a farmer said he saw a flying saucer rise up from a swampy area and fly away. Later he had seen a roughly circular area of debris and apparently flattened reeds and grass. He assumed that it had been made by the alien spacecraft. However, this was refused by the investigators who stated that this could have been caused by a natural phenomenon.

105 For free distribution

Those who claim that aliens physically make the patterns themselves from spaceships also suggest that they do it using invisible energy beams from space, saving them the trip down here. Still others believe that it is purely a human act. However, the cause behind crop circles remains a mystery until today.

(Adapted from Radford, B. Live Science, January 23, 2013 05:34 pm ET)

1) State whether the following are TRUE or FALSE. a) Crop circles are found everywhere in the world. b) They are made by farmers. c) Crop circles are created at night.

2) Answer the following questions. a) What are ‘crop circles’? b) Where can you find them? c) Who creates crop circles? d) Is there a connection between crop circles and aliens? Give reasons for your answer.

3) Find synonyms for the following from the text.

a) Active during night b) Arousing c) Practical joker d) Muddy

4) Find the highlighted words given in the text. Put the correct form to complete the following table.

NounVerbAdjectiveAdverb

e.g: MysteryMystifyMysterious Mysteriously

5) Give subtitles to each paragraph.

For free distribution106

Activity 4

Listening

Listen to the report and complete the data sheet given.

a) Take off time:b) Date:c) Location:d) Duration of the flight:e) Time of the last message:f) Flight leader:g) Problem:h) Standard procedure for lost flight over sea to follow:i) Number of aircraft:

Activity 5

Writing

Use the details of the data sheet and write the incident in your own words.

Activity 6

Writing

Use the information given below and write a description on the Bermuda Triangle.

■ Located in the Atlantic Ocean, the Bermuda Triangle falls between Bermuda, Puerto Rico and Florida.■ A number of mysterious planes and boat incidents have occurred.

107 For free distribution

■ Most investigations indicate bad weather and human error are the more likely culprits.■ Bermuda Triangle is actually a part of a regularly sailed shipping lane with cruise ships and other boats also frequently sailing through the area.■ Aircraft are also common in the Bermuda Triangle with both private and commercial planes commonly flying through the airspace.■ Stories of unexplained disappearances in the Bermuda Triangle started to reach public awareness around 1950 and have been consistently reported since then.■ Unverified supernatural explanations for Bermuda Triangle incidents have included references to UFO’s and even the mythical lost continent of Atlantis.■ Other explanations have included magnetic anomalies, pirates, deliberate sinkings, hurricanes, gas deposits, rough weather, huge waves and human error.■ Some famous reported incidents involving the Bermuda Triangle include:- The USS Cyclops and its crew of 309 that went missing after leaving Barbados in 1918.- The TBM Avenger bombers that went missing in 1945 during a training flight over the Atlantic.- A Douglas DC-3 aircraft containing 32 people that went missing in 1958, no trace of the aircraft was ever found.- A yacht was found in 1955 that had survived three hurricanes but was missing all its crew.

Activity 7

Speaking

Form two groups. Select one of the following topics and engage in a debate.

■ Crop circles are created by aliens/crop circles are not created by aliens.■ Bermuda Triangle is mysterious place/Bermuda Triangle is not a mysterious place.

For free distribution108

Match the adult animal with the young selecting from the list given below.

puppy, sheep, duckling, cat, dog, pig, goose, piglet, cow, kid, calf, gosling, horse, kitten, duck, foal, goat, chicken, lamb, chick.

Adult animalYoung

DogPuppy

Revision point

Activity 8

Writing

Given below is the picture Dev had with him. What is special about it? Discuss and describe the picture.

109 For free distribution

Spelling Rules

The following endings can be added to nouns, verbs, and adjectives:

noun + -s/es (plural)

verb+ -s/es (after he/she/it)

verb+ -ing

verb+ -ed

adjective+ -er (comparative)

adjective+-est (superlative)

adjective+ -ly (adverb)

books

works

working

worked

cheaper

cheapest

cheaply

ideas

enjoys

enjoying

enjoyed

quicker

quickest

quickly

matches

washes

washing

washed

brighter

brightest

brightly

When we use these endings, there are sometimes changes in spelling. These changes are listed below.

Vowels and consonants

1. Nouns and verbs + -s/es

The ending is -es when the word ends in -s/-ss/-sh/-ch/-x:

match / matches bus/ buses box/ boxeswash /washes miss/misses search/searches

Note also:potato/potatoes tomato/tomatoes do/does go/goes

2. Words ending in -y ( baby, carry, easy, ect)If a word ends in a consonant +y (-by/ -ry/-sy etc.)

For free distribution110

y changes to ie before -s: baby/babies family/families country/countries secretary/secretaries hurry/hurries study/ studies try/triesy chages to i before -ed: hurry/ hurried study/studied apply/applied try/triedy changes to i before -er and -est:

easy/easier/easiest heavy/heavier/heaviest lucky/luckier/luckiesty changes to i before -ly:

easy/easily heavy/heavily temporary/temporarily

y does not change before -ing:hurrying studying applying tryingy does not change if the word ends in a vowel +y (-ay/-ey/-oy/-uy):play/plays/played enjoy/enjoys/enjoyed monkey/monkeys

exception: day/dailyNote also: pay/paid lay/laid say/said

3. Verbs ending in -ie (die, lie, tie)If a verb ends in -ie, ie changes to y before -ing:lie/lying die/dying tie/tying

111 For free distribution

Activity 9

Writing

Fill in the blanks with the plural form of the noun given in brackets.

1. Now that it is Autumn, all the ______________________(leaf) are falling.

2. Santa Claus waited for the ___________________(elf) to finish making the last toys.

3. I've just bought two ________________(loaf) of bread.

4. All the books fit nicely on my four newly built ________________(shelf). 5. A cow gave birth to two new baby _____________________(calf).

6. My grandmother really enjoys knitting _____________________(scarf) for friends.

7. There are _____________________(child) at the bus stop.

8. Many ____________________(box) fell on the floor.

9. There are a lot of _________________________(goose) in my uncle's farm.

10.My father is working in the garden wearing a pair of ____________(glove).

For free distribution112

Activity 10

Group Work

Given below is a part of a famous fairy tale called ‘Jack and The Beanstalk’. Discuss the story and relate it to the class. Write the story in your writing book.

Once upon a time there lived a poor widow and her son Jack. One day, Jack’s mother told him to sell their only cow. Jack went to the market and on the way he met a man who wanted to buy his cow. Jack asked, “What will you give me in return for my cow?” The man answered, “I will give you five magic beans!” Jack took the magic beans and gave the man the cow. But when he reached home…

We can use will/would/may etc. to say something is possible, impossible, probable, certain etc.

Will

What time will he be here?

He will be here soon.

Would

He would be here now (if he wasn't ill).

May

He may be here now. I’m not sure.

Might

He might be here now. I’m not sure.

Could

He could be here now. I’m not sure.

Revision point

113 For free distribution

Activity 11

Fill in the blanks with using suitable words.

( will, would, may, might, could )

1. ............ I borrow your pen?

2. I wish I .............. speak English better.

3. We ............... come and see you next week.

4. I’m cold here, .............. you mind closing the window?

5. Only this time she ............. have to decide.

6. No one ................... solve the puzzle.

7. Dinner .................. be ready at six o'clock.

8. I ................... not have time to do it today.

9. It ....................... be the most difficult decision.

10. Look at that object in the sky................. it be a UFO?

For free distribution114

10 CHOICES IN LIFE

Activity 1

Reading

Read the following descriptions.

RIZWANBATTICALOA“I want to be an expert in Information Technology. After my O/Ls, I will have to follow either Biological or Physical Science for my A/Ls with Physics as a compulsory subject. I would like to enter the Faculty of Information Technology at the University of Moratuwa. However, I need to improve my English as the lectures are conducted only in English.”

AMALIKURUNEGALA “My ambition is to become a qualified musician as I’m very interested in Eastern Music. I hope to continue studying this subject for my A/Ls, which means that I will have to follow the Arts Stream. If I qualify to enter the university, I will have to face an aptitude test held by the University of Visual and Performing Arts.”

VENURAGALLE“I would like to engage in self-employment one day. I like agriculture. I wish to follow the Biological Science stream for A/Ls. I need to get at least a credit pass for Science at O/Ls. I will study Agriculture instead of Physics for my A/L exam.

115 For free distribution

VIKUMANURADHAPURAMy ambition is to be a businessman one day. Therefore it’s better to study Commerce subjects for my A/Ls. If I get good results, I can obtain a degree in Commerce from a number of universities in Sri Lanka. I hope to obtain other professional qualifications in accounting too.

YOGESWARANNUWARA ELIYA“I would like to follow the Science & Technology subject stream in order to be a technician one day. I have to get at least a credit pass for Science at O/Ls. If I don’t score sufficient marks to enter university, I can apply either to UNIVOTEC, Ceylon–German Technical Training Institute or the Automobile Engineering Training Institute at Orugodawatte. However, if I don’t succeed at the examination, I can still apply for the National Vocational Qualification Level 3.

Writing

Fill in the following table. Discuss with your teacher when you fill the requirements needed at Ordinary Level Examination.

NAMEREQUIREMENTS

AT O/LS

REQUIREMENTS

AT A/LS or AFTER

AMBITION/

GOAL

Rizvan• Obtaining a Credit or Distinction pass for English

• Following Biological/Physical Science• Obtaining an A or B pass for Physics

• To be an expert in Information Technology

Amali

Venura

VikumYogeswaran

For free distribution116

Activity 2

Reading

SETTING YOUR PERSONAL GOALS

If you want to live a happy life, tie it to a goal. Not to people or things”

Albert Einstein

Setting your goals is the process

of having a clear vision about your

ideal future, and motivating yourself

to turn your vision into a reality.

It helps you to choose where you

want to go in life. When you know

precisely what you want to achieve,

you know where you have to focus

your efforts. You’ll also identify the

distractions that might lead you astray and correct them before it is too late.

First, start your process of setting personal goals by brainstorming and writing

down what you really enjoy doing. Then evaluate each activity, narrow down

your list and identify what you really want to do. Make sure that the goals that

you have set are the ones that you genuinely want to achieve, not ones that your

parents, family, or others might want you to achieve.

117 For free distribution

“

Finally, break down your goals into smaller

objectives with a clear time frame and work

towards achieving these smaller objectives

within the time frame. Every time you

achieve a smaller objective you will be

self-confident and motivated to achieve

your lifetime goals.

Activity 3

Writing

Read the passage on “Setting Personal Goals”.Copy the following flow chart

into your notebook and fill in the boxes.

For free distribution118

Activity 4

Reading

Enjoy the following cartoon. Note how Calvin expresses his needs using future tense.

e.g.:- I’ll need...… I want…......

Future Tense

■ The Simple Future Tense is usually used to express a single act in future time. e.g.:- The school will reopen on September 2nd.

■ The Future Continuous tense is usually used to express an action which will be in progress at a particular time in the future. e.g.:- We will be answering our English paper at this time tomorrow.

Revision point

119 For free distribution

■ The Future Perfect Tense is usually used to express an action that will be completed before some point in the future. e.g.:- We had better hurry up, or else our train will have left before we reach the station.

■ The future perfect continuous tense is used much like the future perfect, but one of the actions is likely to continue beyond the other. e.g.:- This is a fairly long book and I have read only half of it. In fact, by tomorrow I will have been reading it for three days.

Note- Sometimes we use Present Continuous Tense, Simple Present Tense and ‘going to’ form to denote future actions.

e.g.:- I am practising after school with my teammates as we are taking part in the cricket tournament tomorrow.

Hurry up! The train leaves in ten minutes. I am going to help my mother in the kitchen as soon as I finish my homework.

Activity 5

Fill in the blanks with the correct form of the verbs given within brackets. You need to revise all three tenses to complete this activity.

1. Malinthi is a student. She …………. (study) in grade 11.2. Sanduni …………… (clean) the classroom tomorrow.3. We ………….. (go) on a trip to Kanneliya during our last school vacation.4. You can turn off the radio. I …………… (not, listen) to it.5. While I …………….(do) my homework someone knocked at the door.6. Rizwan ………….. (water) the flowers at this moment.

For free distribution120

7. I usually ………….(drink) a cup of tea early in the morning.8. After this trip, I……………..(visit) Nuwara Eliya four times.9. The Moon ……….. (revolve) round the Earth.10. Mr. Perera ……………… (work) in this office for ten years by 2024.

Activity 6

Speaking

Follow the steps in the flow chart and set your personal goals. Then talk to the class about your ambition. Include the following points in your speech.

• Your goal/ambition in life • What objectives you should achieve at O/Ls at A/Ls After A/Ls or University level in order to achieve your goal

Activity 7

Writing

Write an essay about your goals/ ambitions. Describe;

- What they are .........

- How you plan to achieve them ..........

- How you can serve your motherland by achieving your goals ..........

121 For free distribution

Activity 8

Reading / Writing

Read and enjoy the following poem. Then do the activities that follow.

If you think you are beaten, you are.If you think you dare not, you don't. If you like to win but think you can't, It's almost a cinch you won't.

If you think you'll lose, you're lost. For out in the world we find Success begins with a fellow's will. It's all in the state of mind.

If you think you are outclassed, you are. You've got to think high to rise. You've got to be sure of your-self beforeYou can ever win the prize.

Life's battles don't always goTo the stronger or faster man. But sooner or later, the man who winsIs the man who thinks he can.

by: C. W. Longenecker

1) List all the contractions in the above poem and write the words that have been contracted.

e.g.:- You’re - You are

For free distribution122

2) Answer the following questions.

a.What will happen to you, if you think you are beaten?

b.With what does success begin?

c.What must you do in order to rise in life?

d.Who can win life’s battles?

e.Write the sentence which says that you have to be confident if you want to

win something.

3) List the comparative forms of adjectives mentioned in the poem. Use them in sentences of your own.

e.g.:- stronger

Old Mr. Ben is stronger than many other men of his age.

Activity 9

Reading

Brain Drain

The departure of educated or professional people to more developed

countries

123 For free distribution

B

rain drain refers to the emigration (out-migration) of knowledgeable, well-educated and skilled professionals from their home country to another country. This can take place due to several factors. The most obvious is the availability of better job opportunities in the new country. Other factors that can cause brain drain include: war or conflict, health risks, and political instability.Brain drain occurs most commonly when individuals leave less developed countries with fewer opportunities for career advancement, research, and academic employment and migrate to more developed countries with more opportunities. However, it also occurs in the movement of individuals from one developed country to another developed country.

A country that experiences brain drain faces many problems. In less developed countries, this phenomenon is much more common and the loss is much more substantial. There can be an economic loss for the country as educated professionals leave for better salaries elsewhere. In addition, the development of the country is affected when most of the educated individuals do not use their knowledge for the benefit of their own country.

The loss that occurs in more developed countries is not felt much because these countries generally see an emigration of these educated professionals along with an immigration of other educated professionals.

There are many things governments can do to combat brain drain. If there is an increase in job advancement opportunities and research opportunities in one’s own country, we can reduce the brain drain. The process is difficult and it takes time to establish these sorts of facilities and opportunities, but it is possible, and is becoming increasingly necessary. If we encourage highly-skilled workers to serve their own country, they will not seek better opportunities elsewhere.

Adapted from an article by Jessia Karpilo, Geography Intern

For free distribution124

Writing

1) Match the following words taken from the passage with their synonyms.

1. opportunities advantage2. obvious insecurity3. career considerable4. benefit chances

5. salaries fight6. substantial wages 7. combat job8. advancement clear9. phenomenon progress10. instability occurance

2) Read the passage and answer the questions.

1. What is brain drain?

2. What is the most obvious reason for it?

3. Why is brain drain more crucial in less developed countries?

4. Name three negative effects that less developed countries have to face

due to brain drain.

5. According to the passage which is not an action taken by governments to

stop brain drain?

a. Encouraging highly-skilled workers both inside and outside the

country to work in that country.

b. Increasing job advancement opportunities and research opportunities in

one’s own country.

c. Imposing laws to stop highly skilled workers from leaving their country.

125 For free distribution

3). Use the following words taken from the passage to form new words.

NOUNVERB

emigrationemigrate

advancement

employment

development

education

government

establish

NOUNADJECTIVE

knowledgeknowledgeable

availability

profession

economic

educated

For free distribution126

Conditionals (If clause)

“If” Type One (Possible situations)

“If” type one is used when we talk about real and possible situations.

e.g.:- If you work hard, you will pass the exam easily.

The structure is usually if + present simple and will + infinitive. It’s not

important which clause comes first.

“If” Type Two (Imaginary situations)

“If” type two is used to talk about imaginary situations which may not occur

in reality.

e.g.:-If I won a lot of money, I would give some of it to the poor.

The structure is usually if + past simple and would + infinitive. It’s not

important which clause comes first.

“If” Type Three (Impossible situations)

“If” type three is used to talk about ‘unreal’ or impossible things in the past.

e.g.:- If you had run faster, you would have won the race.

The structure is usually if + past perfect and would + have + past participle.

It’s not important which clause comes first.

Revision point

127 For free distribution

Activity 10

A) Fill in the blanks in the following conditional clauses.

1. If there are enough job opportunities, skilled workers …………………

(stay) in the country.

2. If the governments take suitable actions, they ……………….. (reduce)

brain drain.

3. If these actions............................. (not, take) soon, the country will be

affected by brain drain.

4. If the educated professionals ……………… (leave) the country, they will

not be able to assist the future generation in their motherland.

5. If we serve our own country after finishing our studies, we ……………….

(develop) our motherland.

B) Complete the following conditional clauses.

1. If you devote some time for your studies daily, …

2. If I were an educated professional in Sri Lanka, …

3. If Nisali had run faster, …

4. If Hasim had a bicycle …

5. If I saw a ghost…

Activity 11

Speaking

Let’s have a debate in the class.

Form two groups and have a debate on the following topic.

“We should make use of our skilled knowledge by accepting international

career opportunities”

For free distribution128

Activity 12

Listening

Listen to the dialogue between the Library Assistant and Ganesh and underline

the correct answer.

1. Ganesh is looking for books on

a. Engineering

b. Electronics

c. Literature

2. Application for membership should be counter-signed by the

a. Principal

b. Class teacher

c. Ganesh

3. The annual membership fee is

a. Rs. 500

b. Rs. 100

c. Rs. 5

4. Ganesh can borrow ……………at a time.

a. One book

b. Two books

c. Three books

5. The library is closed on

a. Monday

b. Saturday

c. Sunday