==== BLOCKS ==== 

Information & Communication

Technology

Reading Book

Grade 6

Educational Publications Department

First Print - 2018Second Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0088-6

Published by Educational Publications Department

Printed by: Karunaratne & Sons (Pvt) Ltd.65 C, Thalgahavila Road, Midellamulahena, Horana.

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka

Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha

Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi

Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke

Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we

Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha

Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina

Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada

Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

xu jha; kf;fs; ehkhNthk;xd;Nw ehk; thOk; ,y;yk;ed;Nw clypy; XLk;xd;Nw ek; FUjp epwk;

mjdhy; rNfhjuu; ehkhNthk;xd;wha; thOk; tsUk; ehk; ed;wha; ,t; ,y;ypdpNyeyNk tho;jy; Ntz;Lkd;Nwh

ahtUk; md;G fUizAld;xw;Wik rpwf;f tho;e;jpLjy;nghd;Dk; kzpAk; Kj;Jky;y - mJNtahd;W kopahr; nry;tkd;Nwh.

Mde;j rkuf;Nfhd; ftpijapd; ngau;g;G.

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

Monitoring and SupervisionW. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka - Commissioner General of Educational Publications

Educational Publications DepartmentDirection W. A. Nirmala Piyaseeli- Commissioner of Educational Publications (Development)

Educational Publications Department Co-ordinationH. A. I. P. Upathissa - Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department Board of Editors

Dr. Prasad Wimalarathna - Head,

Faculty of Communication & Media Technology

University of Colombo School of Computing

Dr. V. G. N. Vidanagama - Senior Lecturer,

University of Wayamba

Dr. Senaka Amarakeerthi - Senior Lecturer,

University of Sri Jayawardenapura

W. W. M. D. C. B. Piyasiri - Instructor,

Technical College, Hasalaka

S. Shanmugalingam - Senior Lecturer,

National Institute of Education

H. A. I. P. Upathissa - Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

E. N. Boralugoda - Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

Board of Writers

S. N. O. Rodrigo - Teacher, Chi/ Madagama Abhaya Maha Vidyalaya

Panirendawa

R. M. S. K. Ranathunga - Teacher, CP/ Hoorikaduwa Balika Vidyalaya

Menikhinna

Sanjeewani Daluwaththa - Teacher, President's College Maharagama

E. M. Kusum Udayakanthi - Teacher WP/Ke/ Sri Dharmaloka Maha Vidyalaya

Kelaniya

S. M. D. T. Singhabahu - Teacher

Chi/St. Sebastian Central College

Katuneriya

L. G. I. Priyadarshani - Teacher

Vidyartha Balika Vidyalaya

Kandy

H. A. I. P. Upathissa - Assistant Commissioner

Educational Publications Department

N. Vagisamurthi- Director of Education

(Retired)

T. Mathiwadanan - In Service Advicer

Piliyandala

A. M. Vaseer- Center Manager

Zonal Computer Resource Center

Kahagolla

M. F. M. Jarjoon - Assistant Director of Education

Ministry of Education

Language Editing

W. Indumini Darshika - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentD. R. N. K. Gamage - Assistant Commissioner

Department of Examinations

Illustrations

Lalith Gunathilake -WP/Jaya/ Vidyakara Balika Vidyalaya

Maharagama

Cover Page

C. Hapuarachchi - Computer Assistant

Educational Publications Department

Technical Assistance

B. T. Chathurani Perera - Computer Assistant

Educational Publications Department

J. H. Manorika Priyangani - Computer Assistant

Educational Publications Department

Index

Importance of Computers

Use the Computer Laboratory Safely

Operating System and File Management

Using Mouse and Keyboard to use Application Software

Algorithm & Flow Charts

Using the Internet for collecting Information and Communication

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

14

27

41

55

64

We would be grateful if you could send your suggestions and comments on the content of the grade 6 - 11 Information and Communication Technology textbooks and on the development of the creativity of the students tofeedbackicttextbook@gmail.com

Editorial Board

1For free distribution

Importance of Computers 1

Let's get to know the Computer1.1

My name is Computer. Dear kids, would you like to get to

know about me? I am your friend who is coming closer to your day to day life.

schools etc.

accurately with my help. At the same time I don't get tired as you. I can perform tasks for a long time with

the same speed.

Functions of a Computer1.1.1

The basic functions of a computer are entering data, processing them and producing processed data (information).

InputProcessOutput

Figure 1.1 - Basic Functions of a Computer

2For free distribution

InputOutput

Data & Instructions

Process Data

Information

Activity 1 - See 1.1 in the Workbook.

1.1.2

(It can perform billions of tasks in a second.)

It can provide correct information when correct instructions and data are given.

You can rely on the process and the output.

It produces consistent output when the same input is given.

3For free distribution

It can store a large amount of

data. It can obtain them at any given time for any process.

It can act according to the given instructions. But it cannot take decisions on its own like a human being.

Though the initial cost is high, the maintenance cost is not so.

Devices with Embedded Computers1.1.3

Grandpa, do you know? There is a washing machine at Amal's

house. When we put clothes into it, it automatically washes

and dries them.

It works with the help of a

computer programme.

How is that, son?

4For free distribution

Equipment like washing machines, mobile phones, modern motor vehicles and modern televisions are operated by computer programmes. Computer programmes included in such equipment are known as Embedded Computer Systems.

Smart Phones Washing Machines Modern Cars Smart Televisions

Figure 1.2 - Some Devices with Embedded Computers

Figure 1.3 - Components of a Computer

Internet RouterKeyboard

Speaker

Display

System Unit

Mouse

Let's identify the Components of a Computer1.2

5For free distribution

A computer is a unit which consists of many parts. We can categorise those parts into components according to the nature of the functions they do. ² Input Devices ² Output Devices ² Central Processing Unit ² Main Memory ² Storage Devices² Communication Devices

² Input Devices

The devices which are used to enter data and instructions to computers are called input devices.

Scanner

Microphone

Web Camera Barcode Reader

Keyboard

Mouse

Figure 1.4 - Some Input Devices² Output DevicesThe devices which are used to retrieve the data and information are called output devices.

Computer MonitorPrinterSpeakerMultimedia Projector

Figure 1.5 - Some Output Devices

6For free distribution

² Central Processing Unit (CPU)

Controlling the computer and processing data according to the given instructions are done by the Central Processing Unit.

The Central Processing Unit is located inside the system unit. It cannot be seen from outside.

System Unit Mother Board Central Processing Unit

Figure 1.6 - Location of the Central Processing Unit

² Main Memory

The device which is used to store data, information and instructions

is also called the Random Access Memory (RAM).

Figure 1.7 - Random Access Memory -RAM

7For free distribution

² Storage Devices

The devices which are used to store data, information and instructions are called storage devices.

Internal StorageExternal Storage

Storage

Internal Hard Disk

CD DVD Blue Ray

External Hard disk

Pen Drive

Figure 1.8 - Some Storage Devices

² Communication Devices

The devices which are used to exchange the processed data and information are called communication devices.

Network Interface Card

(NIC)

Modem Router

Figure 1.9 - Wired/Wireless Communication Devices

8For free distribution

Importance of Software1.3

Activity 2 - See 1.2 in the Workbook.

Hey, what do you mean by Software and

Hardware?

Then who is a user?

The person who operates me is called a

'user'.

All the things that you can touch in me are called

hardware.

Things that cannot be touched such as programmes with data

and instructions are called

software.

A user can do different tasks by using software.There are various types

A software is a set of programmes designed to execute certain tasks by using a computer.

9For free distribution

MS WordWord Processing software to prepare

documents

Computer

Games

software

Paintingsoftware to draw

pictures

to listen to

songs and watch videos

Media Player

Video editing

Figure 1.10 - Some Examples for Software

You can study more about software in the forthcoming chapters.

Application of Computers in Various Sectors1.4

Activities in all sectors have become easy by the use of computers. Several examples for such sectors are given below.

Banks

Agriculture

Schools

Factories

Hospitals

Figure 1.11 - Various Sectors that use Computers

10For free distribution

Schools1.4.1

Today, we learnt the History

lesson in a new way. All the children in the class learned

attentively.

How was that?

Today we learnt using computers.

Buddy, you know, a lot of

work can be done using

computers in school.

Figure 1.13 - Computer enabled

Learning Situation

Figure 1.12 - Working in the school

Computers simplify work and bring

school system.

Computers are used instead of blackboard and books in the learning process.

11For free distribution

Figure 1.14 - Getting knowledge from the internet

Obtain additional knowledge related to subjects by accessing the internet.

Banking1.4.2

Computer has become an essential tool in the banking activities.

Figure 1.17 - Internet

Banking

Use of Automated Teller Machine (ATM) to deposit and withdraw money.

Using electronic cards to settle bills when purchasing goods.

Internet banking and mobile banking arelatest trends in the banking system.

Figure 1.15 - An ATM

machine

Figure 1.16 - Paying bills by electronic cards

12For free distribution

Hospitals1.4.3

There are many examples of using computer systems in hospitals.

Figure 1.19 - Use of computers and computer embedded devices in ICU

Figure 1.18 - Thermometer

Figure 1.20 - Use of computers and computer embedded devices in an operation theatre

Digital thermometer is an embedded computer device which can be used at home.

Use of computer and embedded computer devices in Intensive Care Unit (ICU).

Use of computers and computer embedded devices in an operation theatre.

Factories1.4.4

Figure 1.21 - Use of Robotic Technology

² Human labour is replaced by computer

devices. As a result, production can be increased.

² The use of robotic technology is a

latest improvement in industrial work. Activities in industrial sector have become easier by that.

13For free distribution

Agriculture1.4.5

Figure 1.22 - Supplying Water and Fertilizer using Modern Technology in Agriculture

Embedded computer devices are used in various activities such as harvesting,weeding and water supplying. Thus, the productivity can be increased by minimising expenditure.

Summary

³ The main tasks of the computer are input, processing and

output.³ Input devices, memory, CPU, output device, communication

devices are identified as the main parts of a computer.

³ Software is essential to do different tasks of the user.

³ Computer is used for various activities of day to day life.

³ Smart phones, modern televisions and washing machines can

be identified as equipment with embedded computer systems.

Activity 3 - See 1.3 in the Workbook.

14For free distribution

Let's Identify the Computer Laboratory2.1

Computer Laboratory

Wait... Let's read those notices and go

inside.

Alright, let's

go in.

Remove footwear before enteringKeep your bags and other

instruments outside.

Do not bring in CD or pendrives without

permission.

Hello,children.

I welcome all of you to the computer lab. This computer lab is a valuable resource in our school. Since you all are new to this place, you need to know about this computer lab and

how to use it well.

2 Use the Computer Laboratory

Safely

15For free distribution

Computers and other accessories have been installed in the computer laboratory. Printers" scanners" multi-media projectors are some of them. Computers and other accessories in a lab are expensive and valuable. A large amount of money have to be spent to repair a device, if it is damaged or to replace a new one. Therefore, it is your responsibility to use them properly and keep them safe.

Figer 2.1 - A Computer laboratory

Let's use the Computer Laboratory Correctly2.1.1

Guidelines for your safetyGuidelines for the safety of the

devices

Using the computer laboratory correctly and

safely

16For free distribution

Be careful when you

touch devices such as wires and sockets that are connected to electricity.

extinguishers if any.

Avoid running and playing inside the computer laboratory.

Should be aware of the exit doors of the laboratory.

For your safety

For the safety of the devices

Do not supply power

to devices without correct instructions.

All the equipment must be switched off

properly after use.

Virus scanning should be done

when connecting external

drives to the computer.

The used equipment should

be placed in the

proper place.

Avoid taking food, water or other liquid into the laboratory because

they may damage the

equipment.

Footwear should be removed and placed outside the laboratory.

The laboratory and

all the equipment should be kept clean

and dust-free.

17For free distribution

Activity 1 - See 2.1 in the Workbook.

Let's operate the Computer2.2.1

We must practise to operate the computer correctly from our childhood. For that follow the guidelines given below.

4

First, supply electricity to the computer by turning on the switch connected to the computer.

If the computer is connected to an uninterrupted power supply (UPS), turn it on.

Finally, the monitor should be turned on.

Next, the system unit should be switched on.

1

2

3

Anyhow, the above steps may differ in modern computers (like laptop computers) which come with a single power button.

Please follow your teacher's instructions at all times since the above steps might be different in your laboratory.

18For free distribution

Selva, how to turn off this

computer now?

No, no, don't do harmful things to computer. Let's ask

the teacher.

Don't know. Let's check by pressing all

the buttons.

How to shut down the computer?The functioning computers should be shut down in a proper way. Otherwise, the life span of the computer may be shortened.

First, we should close any programmes that we have opened.

Then, select the command ''Shutdown'' and click on it.

Switch off the power on/off button of the monitor

when it's screen becomes dark.

Then, switch off the UPS and the wall switch respectively.

Let's learn Computer Ethics2.2.2

zzuy;a fi;a jvjk isß;a u,aoï n,ñk isß;a fyd| oekf.k uy;a hiisß ,nkq fof,dúkZZ - isß;a u,aou

zzMahath seth wadawanaSirith maldam balaminaSirith honda denagenaMahath yasasiri labanu delowinaZZ - Sirith Maldama Meaning :Read Sirith maldama. It brings you peace. Learn and practise good values from it and it will bring you good fortune in this life and lives to come.Dear children, you always get advices to be a good child at home and at school. These advices are called ethics, values, or good customs.

19For free distribution

Good practices help to lead a good life. Similarly, there is a set of ethics that should be followed to use the computer properly.

Activity 2 - See 2.2 in the Workbook.

This code of ethics can be considered as a set of guidelines that help you to use the computer properly.

When we use the computer laboratory...

we must use computers without

disturbing others.

Software which should

be used by paying money should not be fakely used or copied.

we must not

repair any computer devices

without proper

instructions.

we must not

access the

internetwithout the supervision of

teachers.

we should not uninstall/

change/ delete any programmes without the permission of the

teacher.

we must avoid hacking computer activities

of others.

we must refrain from

accessing computer

of others without

permission.

20For free distribution

In additon, there can be some other rules and regulations related to your laboratory.

The above regulations are for grade 6 students like you. You will learn more on computer ethics in the forthcoming grades.

Activity 3 - See 2.3 in the Workbook.

Let's use Correct Postures when using Computers2.2.3

Nizam, why are you looking at

the monitor so closely?

Why are you bending towards the monitor? Piyal, keep that chair properly and sit facing the front. Children stop your work and listen to me carefully.

It is common for various health problems to occur when using computers constantly. Most of the illnesses occur due to the lack of maintaining a correct posture. So we need to practise maintaining a correct posture from our childhood.

21For free distribution

A

C

B

E

DFigure 2.2 - Maintaining a Correct Posture when using a Computer

Correct postures to be followedWhen correct postures are

not maintainedA. Always keep the computer screen

at the level of your eyes or little below.

Pain in the eye, problems in eyesight and tearful eyes can occur.B. The distance between your eyes

and the computer screen should be between 18 and 28 inches.C. Sit straight by leaning on to the

back of the chair.

Pain in backbone.

D. Keep your legs vertically and place

your feet on the ground.

Strain in feet.

E. Keep the keyboard and the mouse

at the level of your elbow.

22For free distribution

In addition, adjust the brightness and the contrast of the computer screen to suit your eye. Often give a rest to your eye if you are working on your computer for a long period of time.

Although an incorrect posture can cause health issues, the computer is not a device that can be discarded. Therefore, we must use the computer properly to avoid such problems.

Activity 4 - See 2.4 in Workbook.

Let's dispose Electronic Waste Safely 2.2.4

LeadDamage the brain, kidneys and disorders in blood circulation

Barium Brain swelling, muscle weakness, damage to heart

MercuryDamage to kidneys and nervous system

BerylliumLung Cancer

All computer hardware is considered as electronic waste when they become out of use or

when the user discards them.

When these harmful substances enter

the human body. They can cause various diseases. They can cause various day-to-day inconveniences and gradually lead to d evelop various long-term non-curable diseases such as

cancers and kidney diseases.

When we dispose these tools improperly to the environment it can cause great damage to the environment as well as to human

beings, since they have been manufactured from various harmful

metals such as Copper, Aluminum

and Lead as well as from plastic.

Figure 2.3 - Illnesses that can be caused due to

electronic waste

23For free distribution

Since, these hazards can cause damages for generations, they must be disposed properly. For that, the 3R system can be used.

Figure 2.4 - 3R Method

1' Reduce

It is not necessary to upgrade to new equipment periodically if we maintain existing equipment properly as to use them for a long time.

This reduces the amount of waste that is released to the environment.

One day, there was a problem in our computer. My sister told father to buy

a new one. But he brought necessary

parts and repaired the computer.

Activity 5 - See 2.5 in the Workbook.

2' Reuse

When purchasing new equipment, consider donating or selling the old equipment if they are in working condition, without discarding them.

24For free distribution

Figure 2.5 - Uses of Discarded

Computers

If it is not in working condition, then it can be utilized for other purposes.

For instance, as shown in the picture, an

pot and a casing of the system unit can be used as a garbage bin.

The amount of waste that is released to the environment is therefore minimal.

3' Recycle

Equipment which are not repairable or reusable, should be recycled without discarding them. It should be handed over to a electronic waste recycling company.

Recycling is a process of transforming the waste to a new product. Waste is separated into small parts and new material is produced through machinery.

Activity 6 - See 2.6 in the Workbook.

Let's use Passwords to protect Computers2.2.5

Computers should be safeguarded

physically as well as logically.

25For free distribution

You must have read in fairy tales that a door is opened with a secret word. Also, there is a key to open main door of your house. Can you open the door without a key?

To protect the information stored in the computer from outsiders, a secret word can be set in the computer. That is known as a password.

Then you must enter the password before entering the computer. If the password is incorrect, the computer does not allow you to enter.

Follow the guidelines given below when setting a password

The password must be a collection of letters (A-Z), numbers (0 - 9),

and symbols (@, #, $). It should have a minimum of 8 characters including at least one of the above types.

The password must not include some simple information like your

name, birthday, etc. which can be easily guessed.

You can give a password hint.

In case you forget the password, you can give a word or a statement as a hint that will help you to recall it again.

By giving an e-mail address, the password can be restored.

Activity 7 - See 2.7 in the Workbook.

26For free distribution

It's our responsibility to avoid damaging any equipment in the laboratory.

Passwords can be used to protect the computers.

Electronic waste should be disposed properly without harming the environment.When using the computer, maintain a correct posture to

and from long term health issues.

Summary

Turn on the computerTurn off the computer

Electric Supply

UPS

System Unit

Monitor

Opened programmes

Start

Operating System

Start

Monitor

UPS

Electric supply

³

³

³

³

³

27For free distribution

3

An operating system is essential to run a computer.Similarly, file management

can be done through an

operating system.

What do you mean by

file management?It means...

window, etc.

3.1

between the user and the hardware. It also helps to manage other software in the computer.

User

28For free distribution

What do you mean by an

I will make it clear to you. I too

Please, say it, so that we

Other players are like software and hardware.

Captain

PlayersSoftware, Hardware

Eg: Windows" "

29For free distribution

O/S O/S

O/S

3.2

interface is displayed on the screen when the computer is turned on.

30For free distribution

3.2.1

We can keep a lot of documents in the computer as we keep drawings

Hello Sahan, what

are you doing?

Gayan, I drew

an art on the

computer.

Not only art, a lot of other

it.

On the computer?

How is that?

Can you bring your

art?

Yes, let's go to our computer laboratory in the school. Then, I'll show you.

How does an operating

You mAean, can a

commands?

* To edit documents.

preferred place.

31For free distribution

competition

will get a broader knowledge about them in higher grades.

or a programme, it is displayed on the user interface.

You can use the icons which are shown on the user interface to

programme.

a folder or a programme.

32For free distribution

It is used to

application software to

''Kamal".

kamal.

Let's see how certain tasks are done using a graphic software to learn more

draw images, charts, shapes, diagrams,

33For free distribution

3.2.2

The working window is displayed once you open a software.

and closed X .

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

X

Start

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

X

Start

an Art

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

X

Start

StartMy Pet

Here the window is hidden. The window you opened disappears and is kept on the task bar. It is shown by words or an icon.

Eg: My Pet or

For free distribution

the working window.

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

My PetX

EditView Window HelpEditView Window Help

X

My Pet

StartStart

It will shrink when you re-click the button again.

that appears on the screen. When the mouse pointer is brought to the edge of the window, arrow shapes are shown. By dragging these arrow

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

My PetX

EditView Window HelpEditView Window Help

X

My Pet

StartStart

For free distribution

XClick the X button on the top right hand corner to close a window.

EditViewWindowHelpEditViewWindowHelp

My PetX

X

Start

When you click the X button, you

not.

NewOpenClose

Print

EditViewWindowHelp

CloseC

X

YesNoCancel

Start

to use it later, Select 'Yes' command

the ''No'' command.

3.2.3

File of the sportsmeet agenda

sportsmeetFile of the sportsmeet images of the sportsmeetFile of sportsmeet videos

to you.

For free distribution

Symbols like ; < > ... can be used to name a

A folder

like documents, images, etc.

When you double

folder, its content is displayed on a working window.

You can use scroll

document up and down as well as from left to right.

The name of the

programme will be shown on the title bar.

The menu bar contains commands to carry out tasks in a folder, a document or a programme.

The tool bar contains

menu bar.

37For free distribution

Multiple working windows can be opened simultaneously.

in front of the other windows and its title bar is highlighted.

The opened windows are displayed as buttons on the task bar. The button related to

is displayed in another colour.

To switch between windows, click on

the task bar.

NewOpenClose

Print

EditViewWindowHelp

CloseClose

X

Start

38For free distribution

NewOpenClose

Print

EditViewWindowHelp

CloseC

X

YesNoCancel

Start

despite the selected command, the

opened.

NewOpenClose

Print

EditViewWindowHelp

X

Start

39For free distribution

are created by the same software in the same folder. The operation

NewOpenClose

Print

EditViewHelp

Open

X

Start

location and the name. Then, click on it.

CutCopy

Clear

EditViewWindowHelpEditEdi

CopyCopy

X

Start

For free distribution

³

computer.

³

³

³

³

contains only a name.

screen click the

the top right hand corner of the screen.

window, click the

the task bar.

button to enlarge the

window to the entire screen.

To close the window, click the close button.

41For free distribution

Using Mouse and Keyboard

to use Application Software4

There's a computer.

to listen a song, to type a letter, to draw

a picture, what else

do you need?

Application Software4.1

Teacher, I would like to draw a picture.

Teacher, I would like to

type a letter.

Teacher, I would like to

listen to a song.Yes, children, we can do all those things. There are separate tools (programmes) fo that.

We should know about the keyboard and the

mouse to do those things.

42For free distribution

Examples for Tasks that can be done by a Computer4.1

Editing pictures

Sending e-mails

Watching a video

Searchinginformation in

internet

Computer Games

Preparing budget reports and expenditure estimates, etc.

Preparing documents (letters, reports, lesson notes, etc.)

Figure 4.1 - Several Tasks that can be done through a Computer

Various programmes which execute such requirements of the

user are called application software.

Types of Application Software4.1.1

Application software is mainly divided into two parts. They are;

Application Software

General Purpose Application SoftwareSpecial Purpose Application Software

Software which is used in computers for general requirements of day to day work. eg:- Word processing software to prepare letters

and documents.- Spreadsheets software to prepare budget

reports, etc.- Web browsers to search information on

the internet.- Drawing software to draw pictures.

Software customized only for user

eg:- Computer games.- School management systems- Library management systems- Banking management systems

Figure 4.2 - Categorizing Application Software

43For free distribution

I downloaded a new

App.

An app is a type of application software.

What do you mean by

an App?

App

Application Software

Google Map Eg:

Basic Tools needed to use Application Software4.2

When using application software, basically the keyboard and the mouse

of the mouse and the keyboard to accomplish various tasks using application software. You should properly train yourself to use them.

Using the Mouse4.2.1

Controlling the pointer on the screen can be done by moving the mouse.

by clicking the buttons on the mouse.

The arrow mark shown on

mouse pointer or the cursor.

44For free distribution

Activity 1 - See 4.1 in the Workbook.

Main Parts of a Mouse

Normally, the mouse has a left and a right button and a small wheel in the middle.

Scroll Wheel

to move up

and down

Right ButtonLeft Button

Figure 4.3 - Main Parts of a Mouse

Activity 2 - See 4.2 in the Workbook.

Let's identify several types of mouse that are in use.

Mouse

Wireless MouseTouch Pad

Figure 4.4 - Examples for Mouse Types

45For free distribution

Functions of the MouseMany tasks can be performed on the computer screen with a mouse. They can be divided into following three categories. Eg: ² Selecting necessary items ² Opening necessary items ² Moving necessary items

Selecting necessary items

Start

To do this, bring the cursor on to the item and click the left button once. Then the item is highlighted.

Opening necessary items

Method I

By double-clicking the left button, you can

corresponding icon.

Method II

CutCopyPasteDelete

OpenOnce you click the right button on the icon, select the 'open' command from the sub menu.

46For free distribution

Moving necessary items

Click the left button, then drag and drop it.

In addition, a mouse scroll is used to move the working window up and down. Here, a wheel in the mouse is rotated to move the page up and down.

Let's use the Mouse Properly

Figure 4.5 - Using the

mouse properly

When we use the mouse, we need to learn to

hold it properly. Holding the mouse inproperly

Figure 4.6 - Using the mouse inproperly

47For free distribution

Keyboard4.2.2

There are various keyboards such as wired keyboards, wireless keyboards and touch keyboards.

Figure 4.7 - Keyboard Figure 4.8 - Wireless Keyboard

Figure 4.9 - Touch Keyboard

Types of Keys in the Keyboard and Their Functions

To select the way of typing and formatting

The numeric keys are located at the top of the keyboard and at the right corner.

letter keys arrow keys

The question mark/fullstoplocated at the right side of the

characters can

be used.

Figure 4.10 - Parts of the Keyboard

48For free distribution

There is a vertical line that appears and disappears when you are about to start typing on a document or a box. It is the cursor.

Letter keys are used to type letters. Letter-keys are not located in the order of the English alphabet. The manner in which the letter keys are located on the keyboard is known as 'QWERTY' layout.

The cursor shows the location where the typing starts.

Use the Caps Lock key

After pressing the Caps lock key once, you can type in capital letters. When you need to type normally, press the Caps lock key again.

” Pressing Caps Lock key once

A, C, D

” When you press Caps Lock

again a, c, d

Use the Shift key

There are two Shift keys on the right and left hand on a keyboard. When letter keys are pressed while pressing on the shift key, letters are typed in capital letters. Similarly, while pressing the Shift key, if you press other keys, the symbol at the top of the key is typed.

+

A

+

?

caps lock

shift key

shift

key

A

?/

Activity 3 - See 4.3 in Workbook.

49For free distribution

Space bar - It is used to insert space between words. By pressing this key once, you can get one

space and by pressing it twice, you can get two spaces. Likewise, you can press it several times to get the needed space. Eg:- Pressing once. Pressing twice.

Tab key - It is used to insert a large space between words. If you press it once, one space is kept

and by pressing it twice, two spaces can be kept. Eg:- Pressing once. Pressing twice.

Enter key - This key is used to take the cursor one line below. Eg:- Pressing once

Arrow keys - These keys are used to move the cursor up and down and from right or left.

Backspace key - By pressing this once, one letter, space or a number on the left side is deleted.

Let's use the Keyboard Correctly

When we fail to use the keyboard correctly, it will cause inconvenience

Figure 4.11 - The method of keeping hands on the keyboard correctly

Let's learn how to use the Application Software4.3

It is intended to provide an understanding about some of the application software and we look forward to discuss audio and video software in the forthcoming chapters.

50For free distribution

Graphic Software

Later, software was produced to draw pictures using the computer.

Figure 4.12 - A hand drawn painting Figure 4.13 - An art drwan using a computer

Activity 4 - See 4.4 in the Workbook.

Different software is used to create graphics and to draw arts. This software is known as graphic software.

Adobe IllustratorMicrosoft Paint

Figure 4.14 - Examples for Grapic Software

Activity 5 - See 4.5 in the Workbook.

51For free distribution

Word Processing Software

The software we use to create and store documents that are needed in everyday life is called word processing software.

Figure 4.15 - Examples for Word Processing Software

Activity 6 - See 4.6 in the Workbook.

Audio and Video Editing Software

Today, our school's media club showed us

the video of the Prize Giving ceremony. They have removed the unnecessary parts

and edited it beautifully. Do you know

how to do it?

Audio-visual editing

software? What is

that?

Yes, you need audio-visual editing

software for that.

52For free distribution

Software has been developed to edit audio and video recordings. Many tasks can be done using this software.

Audio

Hearing

- Audio Has voiceEg: Radio Programmes

Visual

Sight

- Video Has voice and imagesThat means, audio-visual Eg: Television programmes

Among several software which is designed to create and edit audio-video material, software created to edit audio recordings is known as audio editing software and software created to edit video recordings is known as video editing software.

Openshot

AudacityAdobe AuditionAdobe Premiere Pro

Figure 4.16 - Examples for Audio Editing

Software

Figure 4.17 - Examples for Video Editing

Software

Activity 7 - See 4.7 in the Workbook.

53For free distribution

Creating Audio-Video Files

Do you mean that by

using a software we can record what we are talking now and edit it as

required?Yes, we can edit

it using suitable

software.

But, we have to think about a lot of things when

we edit the sound tracks and videos. We cannot

do it as we wish.

It is very important to comply with the ethics in editing audio and video recordings.

When we record voices and images of others, their permission must be obtained. (In case of small children, the

permisson of their parents or

school must be obtained.)

When editing recordings

of voices and images of others, they should not be done in a manner

as to make them

uncomfortable.Editing should not be done in a manner as to give

a false idea or a

message.

If edited audio or video files are made available, it must be done by protecting the identity of you or relevant people.

You should not use

the knowledge of editing software for fraudulent purposes.

Activity 8 - See 4.8 in the Workbook.

54For free distribution

Summary

³

called application software. Eg: graphics software, word processing software, audio-

video software

³ Knowledge of the keyboard and the mouse is important to

use application software.

³ Right button, left button and scroll wheel are the main parts

of a mouse.

Scroll wheel

Right buttonLeft button

To select the way of typing and formatting

The numeric keys are located at the top of the keyboard and at the right corner.

letter keys arrow keys

The question mark/fullstoplocated at the

right side of the characters

can be used.

55For free distribution

Algorithm and Flow Charts5

Process of Solving Practical Problems5.1

Imagine that a group of relatives have arrived when you were alone in the house. You need to serve them some tea. Here, you should prepare a cup of tea by following different steps.

On another occasion, you will have to make a fruit salad for a dessert or make a birthday cake. On all these occasions, you need to solve problems. Compare it with calculating the area of a rectangle during your mathematics lesson.

When we have a certain aim, we do certain activities to achieve it. In our day to day life, we often solve problems.

Problem Solving5.1.1

The problem needs to be analyzed well before solving it. Then you can get a good understanding of how to solve the problem. The process of problem solving has an input, an outcome and a process.

Input - Things to be included to solve the problem.Process - Guidelines to be followed to solve the problem.Output - The result you get after solving the problem.

Thus, you will understand that processing content according to a recipe is known as solving problems.

56For free distribution

Example: 1The input, process and output of preparing a fruit salad is as follows.

Input - a variety of fruitsProcess - washing fruits, cutting fruit, mixingOutput - Fruit salad

Example: 2

follows.

Input - the length and the width of the rectangleProcess - length x widthOutput - area of the rectangle

Activity 01 - See 5.1 in the Workbook.

Algorithm 5.2

If you are able to prepare a cup of tea, tie the shoe lace correctly, or put on the school uniform correctly, then you know how to use an algorithm.

Preparing a

cup of tea

Making a cakePreparing a

fruit salad

Put on schooluniform correctly

Figure 5.1 - Some instances in daily life where we use algorithms

57For free distribution

What is an algorithm?5.2.1

AlgorithmA method that includes all the steps of solving a problem in order is known as an algorithm.

Example 1 Steps to create a fruits salad are as follows.

Step 01

Finding various kinds of fruits

Step 02

Washing all the fruits well

Step 03

Cutting fruits into small pieces

Step 04

Putting the pieces of fruit into a bowl

Step 05Add sugar and mix

Step 06

Serve the fruit salad in bowls

It's important to write the steps sequentially in an algorithm. Think about what will happen if the sixth step is done as the second step. All the fruits mixed with sugar should be washed again.

58For free distribution

Therefore, it is important to write the steps of an algorithm sequentially.

Writing Algorithm5.2.2

When writing an algorithm in a standard way, every algorithm must have a start and an end. Therefore, it is compulsory to include an initial

steps.

Example 1

The algorithm for making a chocolate cake

Step 01StartStep 02Clean and wash the baking tray and other bowlsStep 03Dissolve chocolateStep 04

Step 05Beat butter until it gets creamy. While beating, add sugar little by littleStep 06Add the eggs one by one to the sugar and butter mixture

Step 07Add the dissolved chocolate

Step 08Add milkStep 09Put the mixture into the baking tray and bake it

Step 10Let it cool after bakingStep 11Decorate as you wish and serve it

Step 12End

59For free distribution

Example 2

Steps 01StartSteps 02Get the length of the rectangle

Steps 03Get the width of the rectangleSteps 04Area = length x width

Steps 05Get the area of the rectangleSteps 06End

Activity 02 - See 5.2 in the Workbook.

Flow Chart 5.3

Here, standard symbols are used to show each action.

SymbolUsageUsed to indicate the start and the end.

Eg:End

Used to indicate the input and the output.Eg:

Entering student's marks

Serving Fruit Salad

60For free distribution

Used to show an action/a process

Eg: Adding eggs one by one to the mixture of sugar

and butter and beating it.

Area = length x width

Yes

No

Used to indicate an instance of decision making.

greater than second

number?

Yes

No

It is used to indicate the direction of

Activity 03 - See 5.3 in the Workbook.

61For free distribution

Example 01

is given below.

Here the symbols related to start, end input out and process are used.

Start

End

Getting various fruits

Serve the prepared fruit salad

Wash fruits well

Cut fruits into small pieces

Put the fruit pieces into a bowl

Add sugar and mix

62For free distribution

Example 02

Start

End

Get the length of the rectangle

Get the width of the rectangle

Multiply length and width to obtain the area

Find the area

Activity 04 - See 5.4 in the Workbook.

63For free distribution

Summary

³ Before the problem is resolved, it needs to be analyzed well.

³ There is an input, output and a process when solving a problem.

³

'input', the steps to be followed when solving a problem are

the problem is named as the 'output'.

³ A method set out in order including all the steps needed to

solve any problem is identified as an algorithm.

³ A standard algorithm must have a start and an end.

³

³ shape is used to indicate the start and the end.

³ shape is used to indicate the input and the output.

³ shape is used to indicate the process.

³ shape is used to indicate the decision taken.

64For free distribution

Using the Internet for collecting Information and Communication6

Let's learn about the Internet6.1

Brother, our teacher said that

internet?The internet is a large

interconnected

Computer

NetworkInternet

65For free distribution

Accessing Internet 6.2

we use the internet to

Figure 6.1 - Model of a Web Page

66For free distribution

Web Browser6.2.1

Eg:

Use of Web Browsers6.2.2

Start

Address bar

67For free distribution

Eg:

Figure 6.2 - Website of the Ministry of Education

Figure 6.3 - Address Bar

File Edit View Favorites Tools Help

Address

Back

Figure 6.4 - Web Address of the Educational Publications Department

68For free distribution

You can access the

You can return to the

By clicking the

you clicked the By clicking the

access the directory

Back

Figure 6.5 - Some Buttons in a Web Browser

Back

Obtaining Information from Educational Websites6.3

Brother, now you know a

sea creatures too?

69For free distribution

Let's learn about Search Engines 6.4

search engines as we

Brother,

70For free distribution

Use of Search Engines

Book Rack

1

3

2

6

71For free distribution

²

Figure 6.6 - Search Engines

Opening and Using Search Engines

key on the

72For free distribution

use 'History Sri Lanka'

Tips for making Search Results more effective

•

•

Figure 6.7 - Search Information using a Search Engine

73For free distribution

Activity 1 - See 6.1 in Workbook

Kandy,

4&

74For free distribution

Let's use the Internet Safely6.5

do you know why we need

internet?

those when we use the

75For free distribution

Provide Usernames and Passwords when Accessing Websites6.5.1

76For free distribution

Use E-mail Safely6.5.2

Doing Safe Online Transactions6.5.3

77For free distribution

Activity 2 - See 6.2 in the Workbook.

Summary

³

³

³

78For free distribution

³

³

³

³

³

Web BrowserSearch Engine

For free distribution

79

For free distribution

80

For free distribution

81

For free distribution

82

For free distribution

83

For free distribution

84

For free distribution

85

For free distribution

86

For free distribution

87

For free distribution

88

For free distribution

89

For free distribution

90

For free distribution

91

For free distribution

92

For free distribution

93

For free distribution

94

For free distribution

95

For free distribution

96

For free distribution

97

For free distribution

98