111

In the past, people engaged in sports as a form of recreation and means of displaying their physical strength. The early Olympic Games were held with a view of developing a healthy body and mind, upgrading social ethics and creating a law abiding society. The political and socio-economic changes that took place in various countries in the world influenced the field of sports as well. Along with the socio-economic developments that took place, the needs of the participants in sports changed. Consequently most sports developed into a highly organized state to cater to the needs and demands of the society. In order to address issues related to each sport, governing bodies at national and international levels were established and rules and regulations were formulated.

In the previous grades you learnt about the origin of rules and regulations, ethics and social values in sports. In this chapter, you will gain knowledge on what is meant by rules and regulations in sports, the need for such rules and regulations, evolution of the Olympic Games, doping in sports and the roles of different parties in organizing sporting events at school level.

Rules and regulations in sports

Rules and regulations of sports are the guidelines created, accepted and imposed by the national and international sport governing bodies. It is to facilitate the conduct and development of sports. This will also enable the respective governing bodies to take disciplinary action against those who violate rules and regulations and will also be revised depending on the needs. It is interesting to know that there are games with no set rules and regulations. These games are played adhering to an unwritten set of rules and regulations which have passed down from generation to generation.

The need for rules and regulations in sports

The reason for rules and regulations in sports can be listed as follows:

1. to maintain ethics in sports2. to maintain enthusiasm in sports

6

Let us adhere to rules, regulations and ethics in sports

112

3. to maintain the dignity of sports4. to develop personal values5. to regulate games and minimize accidents6. to protect the rights of the participants7. to resolve problems related to sports.

1. Maintaining ethics of sports

You must have noticed that the participants of a sporting event always respect each other. When participants in sports follow rules and regulations, they also get used to maintaining social ethics. At the start and finish of a sports competition, the participants should exchange greetings and greet the judges and the audience. For instance, when a competition or a game is over, the members of the opposing teams, regardless of who the winners are, shake hands, hug one another and also show their gratitude to the judges and the audience as well.

At Berlin Olympics in 1936, Jesse Owens of United States of America and Luz Long of Germany had tied in the men’s long jump marking at 7.87 m by the end of the fourth round. Then Luz Long instructed Jesse Owens on ways of improving the running approach. Finally Jesse Owens won the first place making a final jump of 8.06 m. The two athletes then walked around the playground together amidst the cheers of about 80,000 strong group of spectators.

Jesse Owens Luz Long

Figure 6.2

Figure 6.1

113

2. Maintaining enthusiasm in sports

Rules and regulations are very important in maintaining enthusiasm in sports. If sports events are held without abiding by rules and regulations, it will be hard to conduct a fair competition. By acting according to rules, regulations and standards of sports, justice will be served to every participant. When every participant adheres to the same set of rules, each participant gets an equal opportunity to take part in the game keeping up the same spirit from the beginning to the end. When there is adherence to rules and regulations, even the audience will develop confidence in the game. Thus, rules and regulations pave the way for the participants to engage in the game, fans to watch it from the beginning to the end with enthusiasm and accept victory and defeat unquestionably.

3. Maintaining dignity in sports

Figure 6.3

Figure 6.4

114

Rules and regulations are also important in maintaining dignity in sports. When the same set of rules is applied to all participants, justice is served to every one. Therefore, participants abide by the rules and regulations establishing fair play, award victory to the most deserving, and maintain the dignity of the sport.

4. Developing personal values

Any sporting event helps its participants to develop personal values such as the ability to accept victory and defeat equally, engage in play adhering to rules and regulations and respect for each other.

For instance, the test match played between Sri Lanka and New Zealand in Galle in 2012, the wicket keeper of the New Zealand team made an appeal for a catch against Mahela Jayawardane when Mahela was on 91 runs. Mahela left the field without waiting for the umpire to give his decision. It is because he possessed high personal values. The very incident earned Mahela the special award named ICC Spirit of Cricket at ICC Awards 2014.

Figure 6.5

115

5. Regulating sports to minimize accidents

While participating in sporting events, the participants meet with various accidents. These accidents could happen due to several reasons such as the manner in which the game is played, the type of equipment used etc. Therefore, standards have been defined through rules with regard to the use of equipment and participants cannot use equipment as they wish. Rules define the manner in which the participants should play the game.

For example in cricket, a fast bowler cannot bowl a full toss above waist (this delivery is called a Beamer) and in boxing, boxers should wear headgear and mouth guards.

6. Protecting the rights of participants

Rules and regulations safeguard the rights of the participants in sporting events guaranteeing their right to participate, serve justice to every participant and ensure their safety. Rules and regulations have also barred competitors from achieving victory by unfair means and game fixing for other motives.

7. Resolving problems related to sports

In any sport, participants could face various problems and issues with regard to the manner in which the game is played. Such issues may affect the successful conduct of the sport. Therefore rules and regulations have been spelt out on how disputes should be resolved. This paves way for the successful continuation of the sport.

Figure 6.6 - Head gear for Boxers

116

8. Providing entertainment

When playing, participants gain pleasure if the same rules are applied to every participant irrespective of their talents or positions. Every participant will be satisfied with the outcome of the game and be happy.

9. Fair play

At the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games, one athlete as a representative of the competitors and one judge representing the officials take the Olympic Oath. The Olympic Oath is taken for two purposes, namely, rules and regulations of sport are adhered to and ethics are followed by all participants.

The following values of sports are guaranteed through fair play:

• good attitudes towards sports• ethics of sports• prevention of misconduct, doping, violent acts and exploitation in sports• refraining from causing physical or mental suffering to others.

One with great sportsmanship always believes that participation in sports is more important than victory. An example that can be cited is the match between Pakistan and West Indies in the ICC Cricket World Cup tournament in 2011. Pakistan had to get four runs to win in the last delivery. The West Indian bowler was running to deliver the last ball, the Pakistani batsman at the bowlers end had walked forward past the crease. At this point, the bowler could have easily run out the Pakistani player and won the match instead he stopped there, held the ball close to the wicket and warned him not to move forward. In the last delivery Pakistan scored the required four runs and won the match. Despite the victory of the Pakistanis, all the spectators and commentators honoured and showed great respect to the West Indian

Figure 6.7

117

bowler who displayed great sportsmanship. What is evident from this example is that such players always expect victory through fair play only.

These facts make it clear that there should be rules and regulations in sports. Apart from allowing the smooth functioning of the game, it helps identify true sports heroes, protect the spectators and judges, make accurate judgements and prevent fraudulent practices. Sporting rules and regulations contribute a lot in the personal development of the participants and have a great influence on social well-being.

Evolution of the Olympics.

When we speak of sports we are always reminded of the word ‘Olympics’. It is because the Olympics is an international sports competition in which almost all the countries of the world take part. Winning an Olympic event is considered a great honour. Sport is considered to be something dignified, but there have been occasions where sports has caused agitation and damaged its own dignity, match fixing and doping being examples . It is important for you to learn how the Olympic Games evolved over time to it's present status.

• The first recorded Olympic Games were held in Olympia, Greece, in 776 B.C. The competitions were held in a beautiful plain close to the city of Pissa on the Alpians in Athens.

• There are many legends describing the origin of the Olympics, one of which says that Hercules, son of Zeus, the King of Gods, started the Olympics in memory of Zeus.

• Another legend says that Prince Pelopas who fought against King Onamous to marry the king’s daughter defeated the king and started holding Olympic Games to celebrate his victory.

• The winners at Olympic Games were awarded a wreath of olive leaves and honoured with great respect that is accorded to heroes.

Figure 6.8

118

For extra knowledge

• In its early years women were not allowed to take part in the Olympic Games.

• After the Romans had invaded Greece in 146 A.D, the Olympic Games came under Roman influence. Consequently, games in which men used animals, were added. Emperor Theodosius, who was dissatisfied with the violent nature of those games, banned Olympic Games in 394 A.D.

• In 1896 A.D, a Frenchman Pierre de Coubertin started the modern Olympic Games.

• The objective of holding the Olympic Games was to promote world peace and strengthen relationships between nations through the games.

• Several organizations were created to work for the development of sports and to maintain its dignity; International Olympic Committee is the foremost among them.

List of countries hosting Olympic Games since 1896 Table 6.1YearCountryCity

1896Greece Athens1900FranceParis1904AmericaSt. Louis1908United kingdom London1912SwedenStockholm1916Games were not held because of World War I1920BelgiumAntwerp1924FranceParis1928NetherlandsAmsterdam1932AmericaLos Angeles1936GermanyBerlin1940Games were not held because of World War II1944Games were not held because of World War II1948United kingdom London1952FinlandHelsinki1956AustraliaMelbourne1960ItalyRome

119

Activity

1964JapanTokyo1968MexicoMexico City1972GermanyMunich1976CanadaMontreal1980RussiaMoscow1984AmericaLos Angeles1988KoreaSeoul1992SpainBarcelona1996AmericaAtlanta2000AustraliaSydney2004GreeceAthens2008ChinaBeijing2012United kingdom London

By studying this grid, you can learn the years, the countries and the cities in which Olympic Games were held from 1896 to date.

Countries proposed to host the next Olympic Games are as follows:

Year Proposed country City

2016 Brazil Rio de Janeiro2020 Japan Tokyo

Make a list of the events that are included in the Olympic Games at present.

Sports and doping

Modern-day sporting events have become highly competitive since the participants engage in sports as professionals. As a result, participants always try to boost their performance to achieve victory. There has been an increasing trend in doping incidents in sports. However the victories they achieve through the use of performance - enhancing drugs are temporary and such harmful drugs can pose a direct threat to their sporting career.

120

Activity

these harmful drugs cause physical damage to the users in the long run. Competitor’s urine and blood samples are tested to verify if such drugs have been used.

Consequences of doping in sports

• Performance-enhancing drugs can cause severe damage to physical health in the long run and even cause death.• Athletes / players who are found to have taken performance enhancing drugs can be banned from participating in sports.• The victories of such athletes / players can be annulled and they can be stripped of their medals. • Doping in sports brings disgrace on the individual players as well as the country they represent.

Prepare a list of the participants in Olympic Games who have represented Sri Lanka. List their achievements, the names of the medalists and the medals they have won.

Sports events and health and physical education programs held at school level

1. Inter-house sports meet2. Physical fitness programmes 3. Programmes on sports and physical education4. Sports / physical education day5. Appraisal of athletes / players (award of colours)

1. Inter-house sports meet

The Inter-house sports meet is an annual event which is held with the view of developing sporting skills of pupils. Pupils are divided into a few houses and competitions are held in a selected number of events. The houses are awarded points based on the performance in athletics and team events. Each house is ranked according to the points they win. The following objectives are expected to be achieved through inter-house sports competitions:

• Provide opportunity for every pupil to take part in sports events • Develop leadership qualities among pupils• Personality development in the pupils• Appraisal of the sports talents of the pupils• Develop skills related to team work• Promote collective action and team spirit

6. Health week7. Mosquito control "shramadhane'' 8. oral health workshops 9. Workshops to create awareness about non- communicable deseases10.World tuberculosis day

121

• Develop skills related to communication and organization of events• Train pupils to accept victory and defeat alike• Train pupils to adopt a healthy lifestyle• Grooming pupils to face challenges.

Diagram 6.1 shows how duties and responsibilities in organizing an inter-house sports meet can be devolved:

( Note – The above is only a model)

Deputy Principal

Assistant Principals

Teacher-in-charge of sports(chief organizer)

Sports sub-committee

Finance committeeHouse Captain Food committeeSports Captain Decoration committee House Vice-CaptainCommittee-in-charge of displaysSports Vice-CaptainTreasurerVice TreasurerCommittee LeadersSports Team Leaders

Invitation and reception committee Documentation and certificates committee Trophies and awards committee Committee-in-charge of equipment Transport committee

Teachers-in-charge of houses

Principal

Diagram 6.1

122

Activity

Figure 6.9

Prepare a list of duties and responsibilities of a house captain / team leader of an inter-house sports meet.

2. School physical fitness programmes

Outdoor activities contribute a lot in maintaining good health among pupils. The school physical fitness programme is conducted at every school with a view to create a healthy and active generation in Sri Lanka. The Ministry of Education has introduced separate sets of physical exercises for pupils of primary and secondary classes. It is compulsory for every school to engage all the pupils in physical exercises. In addition, there are various other physical fitness programmes organized at school level.

3. Other sports programmes

There are many other sports programmes that are conducted at school level. They include;

Figure 6.10

123

• Different sports competitions • Drill displays• Athletics training camps • Scout and girl guide camps• Training camps for team events • Cadet coaching camps• Camps related to outdoor education• Fitness tests for players / athletes

4. Sports / Physical Education Day

The objective of holding a sports / physical education day at school level is to conduct a one-day workshop to develop sports / physical education skills of the pupils. The following are some of the activities that can be done during such programmes:

• Implementing a programme to check the physical fitness of every pupil.• Measuring the body mass index (BMI) of every pupil • Implementing a programme to improve their nutritional status. • Organizing a sports tournament.• Directing pupils to create and play simple games or improvised forms of games that they already play. • Implementing awareness programmes on the importance of engaging in sports and physical exercises.

Figure 6.11

124

5. Accord recognition to sports persons

Pupils who display outstanding talents in various sports / games deserve due recognition at school. Therefore schools should have formal means of recognizing such pupils. One such way is to award certificates and colours annually to pupils who show outstanding talents in sports events. In addition, pupils can also be encouraged to engage in sports by publishing newspaper reports, displaying reports on the school notice board about those who excelled in various events displaying their names on banners or appreciating them at the school assembly.

6. Health Week

You must be knowing that a health week is declared at schools annually and various programmes related to health are implemented during that week. The objective of holding a health week is to identify and conduct the activities that need to be done in school to create a healthy school environment. Some of the activities that can be implemented at school include: • Conducting a Shramadana campaign at school.

• Removing dangerous and unsafe conditions prevailing in the school environment.

• Exhibiting posters and paintings related to good health.

• Inculcating the habit of taking nutritional food like ‘kolakenda’ among pupils.

Figure 6.12

125

• Engaging pupils in activities such as cleaning the school environment.

• Implementing counselling programmes.

• Raising awareness among pupils on health issues by conducting seminars with the participation of doctors or other officials in the health sector.

• Raising awareness among pupils on road safety in association with police officers.

• Conducting workshops on first aid.

• Conducting clinics on oral health.

• Conducting workshops on improving mental health and implementing religious programmes.

• Raising awareness among pupils on maintaining ideal body weight.

• Conducting workshops on the importance of prevention of the use of alcohol, drugs and smoking which are harmful to the human body.

• Raising awareness among pupils on abuse and delinquency.

• Holding debating competitions on good health.

• Assessing the standard of schools in promoting good health by evaluating the activities performed by the school based on the set criteria.

Figure 6.13

126

 Exercises;

Summary

Rules and regulations in sports have been formulated and accepted by the international associations for sports in order to ensure fairness and equality in conducting sporting events. These rules and regulations are important in maintaining ethics in sports, promoting enthusiasm and dignity of sports, developing personal qualities, minimizing accidents, protecting the rights of participants, solving problems related to sports, engaging in fair play and in maintaining the entertainment that sports provide.

The modern Olympic Games started in 1896 and the Olympics is considered the greatest sports festival in the whole world.

Doping in sports has become a major problem with an increasing trend. Doping in sports causes a great deal of long-term damage to the health of sports person who indulge in. It brings disgrace to the country / school they represent.

We can hold various programmes at school level on health and physical education. The Inter-house sports meet is one of the foremost events which contributes to develop the sporting skills and talents of the pupils. In addition, physical education day, physical fitness programmes, awarding colours and school health week can be implemented at school level to improve the well being of school children.

1. State five advantages that pupils gain by taking part in sports.

2. Write three ill effects of doping in sports.

3. Name four programmes that are implemented at school level on sports and

health education.

4. Write five advantages that are expected to be gained by holding the annual inter-house sports meet.

5. Name three programmes that are implemented during the school health week.