==== BLOCKS ==== 

Grade 11

Geography

Educational Publications Department

ii

All rights reserved

First Print - 2015Second Print - 2016Third Print - 2019

ISBN 978-955-25-0318-4

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Sanvin (Pvt) Ltd. No. 35/3, Keragala Road, Halummahara, Delgoda.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®

|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®

AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ® |ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ

¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hßJØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.

BÚ¢u \©µU÷PõßPÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.

v

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj KariyawasamMinister of Education

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

vii

Monitoring and Supervision - W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General of Educational Publications Direction - W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner (Development), Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination - Anupa Madhupani Weerarathne Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

- Dakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner (2017, 2019) Educational Publications Department

Panel of Editors

1. Prof. N.K. Dhangalla - University of Kelaniya (Emeritus Professor)

2. Prof. S.A. Norbert - University of Colombo

3. R.P. Peiris - Additional Commissioner (Retired), Department of Examinations

4. R.A.D.N. Rupasinghe - Deputy Commissioner, Educational Publications Department

5. Anupa Madhupani Weerarathne - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

6. M. P. Ranjani Dhanawardhana - Director, Department of Social Science, National Institute of Education

7. S. Karunagaran - Lecturer, National Institute of EducationPanel of Writers

1. W.Kanthi Perera Darmawardhana - Teacher Service, St.Peters' Central College Negombo

2. R.A.Chandrasiri - ISA, Divisional Education Office - Maradagahamula, Divulapitiya

3. N.A. Chithralatha - ISA, Zonal Education Office Matara

viii

4. K.K.U Gunarathne - Teacher Service, G/Polpagoda M.V, Yakkalamulla

5. H.M.J.A.B. Heenkenda - ISA, Zonal Ecucation Office, Kandy 6. H.Dahanayake - Chief Editor (Retired) Educational Publications Department

7. K.Somadasa - ISA, Zonal Education Office Matara

8. D.M.J.Bandara - Teacher Service, Kuli/ Saranath M.V, Kuliyapitiya

9. D.H.Attigala - Teacher Service, Museus College, Colombo 07

10. S.Balasundaram - Assistant Commissioner (Retired), Department of Examinations

11. S.A.H.Husna - Assistant Director of Education, Zonal Ecucation Office, Dehiowita

12. Sivachithra Palani - ISA, Zonal Education Office, Jaffna

13. Yalini Karunagaran - Teacher Service, St. Clare's College, Colombo 06Language Editor

Hasini Thalagala - Assistant Director of Education, Ministry of EducationCover Design

R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi - IT Unit, Educational Publications Department

Computer Designing & Formatting(Maps, Figures and Computer Page Designing)

Abisheka Ranasinghege - IT Unit, Educational Publications Department

R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi - IT Unit, Educational Publications Department

ix

Content

Page

1. Natural resources of the Earth 01

2. Natural resources of Sri Lanka 20

3. The world population 52

4. The population of Sri Lanka 63

5. Development 72

6. Natural hazards in the world 87

7. Natural hazards in Sri Lanka 103

8. Climatic changes 116

9. 1: 50 000 Topographical maps of Sri Lanka 123

10. Using graphs to represent data 152

For free distribution

1

Rocks, minerals, soil, water, air, sunlight, vegetation and wildlife has a special place among the other natural resources. Man adds value to resources. Value of resources would be decided according to the needs of man and technology. The value of resources change from time to time.

Natural Resources of the Earth

Fig. 1.1 - Classification of Resources

1

Things that are found in the natural environment which are required for the existence of man and his activities are called natural resources.

Resources of the environment are diverse and they can be classified in many ways. (Fig. 1.1)

The aim of this chapter is to study about natural resources on the Earth such as rocks, minerals, soil, water, air, sunlight, vegetation and wildlife.

For free distribution

2

Natural resources can be categorized in the following manner as well.

Natural resources can be classified as Living and Non-living resources too.

Living Resources Plant and animal resources in the biosphere.

(Biotic components) (Forests, animal resources, aquatic resources).

Non-Living Resources Water in the Hydrosphere, gases in the Atmosphere, minerals and soil in the Lithosphere, soil.

(Abiotic components) (Water, soil, minerals, wind, tides).

Natural Resources

Exhaustible resourcesNon - Exhaustible resourcesRenewable resources

Fossil fuelForestsFertile soilRocksMetal minerals (iron ore, copper, gold)Non Metal minerals (coal, Gems, Silica)

Water

Sunlight

Air

Forests

Soil

Fish

Wild life

Activities

01. Write a suitable definition for “Natural resources.”

02. Explain by citing two examples to show how man converts environmental

resources into valuable resources.

For free distribution

3

Rocks

Rocks have an important place among the other natural resources. The crust of the earth is composed of rocks. Rocks are formed by minerals. We can see some special features in the rocks formed by minerals. Some rocks are soft while some of them are hard. The rock layers are thin in some places while it is deeply spread in others. Hence, the values of the rocks differ according to the composition, distribution and their structure. Rocks can be classified into three types based on their origin.

1. Igneous rocks

2. Sedimentary rocks

3. Metamorphic rocks

Igneous Rocks

Fig. 1.2 - Igneous rocks (Granite) Uses of igneous rocks

²Granite is used to construct buildings.

²Making ornaments.

²To obtain minerals such as tin and chromium.

²Igneous rocks, which are resistant to erosion, in slopes prevent soil erosion.

²To construct highways and roads.

There is an aesthetic value in the different physical formations of these rocks.

Igneous rocks are formed by magma coming from the interior of the Earth and solidifying on the crust. They are also called ''Basic rocks.'' They are crystalline rocks formed by immense heat and pressure. There is a glassy and soft granular structure in them. Granite, basalt, gabbro are some examples for igneous rocks.

Intrusive igneous rocks are formed by cooling and solidifying magma in the interior of the Earth. Extrusive igneous rocks are formed by cooling of hot magma when reaching the surface of the Earth.

For free distribution

4

²Limestone and sandstone are used in constructing buildings.

² Alluvial sedimentary rocks are used for agricultural purposes.

²Used as a raw material in pottery industry.

²For production of ornamental goods.

²Coal is a source of energy.

Metamorphic Rocks

Sedimentary Rocks

Metamorphic rocks are formed when Igneous and Sedimentary rocks are subjected to high pressure and high temperature.

Gneiss, marble, diamonds and dolomite are examples for metamorphic rocks. Metamorphic rocks can be seen more commonly than the other types of rocks.

Uses of metamorphic rocks

²Diamonds are used to make jewellery.

²Marbles are used to create statues and ornaments.

²Graphite is used to make lubricants, casting moulds and paint.

²Dolomite is used for manufacturing fertilizer.

Fig. 1.3 - Sedimentary Rocks (Gypsum)

Sedimentary rocks are formed by deposition and cementation of weathered particles of igneous and metamorphic rocks.

Fig. 1.4 - Metamorphics Rocks (Graphite)

Areas where gneiss rocks were found were selected to construct ancient places of worship as those rocks were hard.

They are also called secondary rocks as they are formed by the sediments of principle rocks. Limestone, Coal and Gypsum can be cited as examples for types of sedimentary rocks.

Uses of sedimentary rocks

For free distribution

5

We discuss the most important resources such as iron ore, graphite and crude oil in this lesson.

Iron Ore - An important factor for the development of human civilization is the use of iron. Iron is extracted from iron ore. Iron ore is cleansed and smelted to extract iron. Through a chemical process, iron is turned into steel. Iron and steel have become very essential materials for industries like agriculture, construction and transportation because of their special qualities.

Activities

01' List the main types of rocks and give two examples for each of them.

02' Draw a poster to show the uses of different kinds of rocks.

Minerals

Minerals also have an important place among natural resources.

"A mineral is a naturally occurring substance that is solid and inorganic representable by a chemical formula and has an ordered atomic structure" Source - https:llenwikipedia.org/wiki/Mineral Earth is formed with rocks and rocks are formed with minerals. There is a strong relationship between minerals and rocks. Igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks are made up of valuable minerals. The value of mineral resources depend on their uses. There are about 2000 kinds of minerals in the world but people use only a few of them. Different kinds of minerals have been used for making weapons and tools during different periods of human civilization.

Mineral resources can be categorized as follows.

Metallic minerals Iron ore, Manganese, Copper

Non Metallic minerals Graphite, Sand, Limestone and Phosphate

Fuel Minerals Coal, Crude oil

For free distribution

6

Main kinds of iron ore are Hematite, Magnetite and Limonite. An iron ore deposit would be economically valuable only if it contributes at least 30% of high quality iron. Map 1.1 shows the regions in the world with iron ore deposits.

Map 1.1 – Distribution of deposits of iron ore in the world

Activities

Iron and steel produced from iron ore are essential resources for industries like agriculture and transportation fields. Explain this statement giving examples.

Graphite

Graphite is an important mineral resource. Graphite industry became very important during the periods of world war. According to the classification of minerals, graphite come under non - metal minerals. Depending on the way it is embedded in the earth graphite can be further classified as follows.

²Vein graphite (As pure slabs) ²Crystalline flake graphite (As Flakes) ²Graphite spread in rocks

For free distribution

7

Main graphite producing countries of the world.

India Turkey

Korea Brazil

Mexico Tanzania

Sri Lanka Madagascar

India is the number one graphite producer in the world, producing 60% of world’s graphite production. Sri Lanka also has gained an important place as a country that produces high quality graphite.

Graphite is an industrial raw material used in the electronic industry, construction of metal coverings, production of lubricants, pencils and paints. Graphite is also important as a heat and electric conductor.

Soil

Activities

1. Name the three types of graphite.

2. Explain the importance of graphite as a resource by giving examples.

3. Mark and name in a blank map of the world, the places where graphite is produced and, locations of the main iron ore deposits in the world.

Soil is an essential resource for man. Survival of plants and animals depend on soil. It provides nutrition and water for the growth of plants. The soil layer is found as a thin layer on the surface of the earth. The thickness of the soil layer differs from one place to another.

Soil is formed by decomposition of organic materials for a long time and by mixing up remains of weathering rocks.

For free distribution

8

Factors that contribute to

the formation of soil

²Parent rock

²Topographical features

²Climate

²Time

²Parts of plants and animals

²Human Activities

Parent rock - Minerals are added to the soil by weathering of parent rock or deposition of sediments. The soil content, (composition) categories and the colour of the soil differ according to the nature of the parent rock.

Topographical features - According to topographical features, erosion of soil on earth's surface, deposition and infiltration of water into soil affect the formation of soil. Nature of soil and the drainage pattern are affected by the slope of an area. Climate - Rainfall and temperature are climatic factors that affect the formation of soil. Interior temperature of the soil, the time period in which the moisture of soil present within a year, quantity of water that is retained in the soil are factors which affect the nature and formation of soil.

Plant and animal parts - Soil organisms and the cover of trees are sources that add organic particles into the soil. The cover of trees is the most important one. In areas where organic systems are abundant, a fertile humus soil layer would be formed within a short period of time.

Time - Time is an important factor in deciding the nature and the maturity of the soil. Fertility of soil increases when organic particles are deposited during a long period of time. Such soil which has a large quantity of mineral salts is suitable for the growth of plants.

Human Activities - Human activities are also a cause for variation of the nature of soil and growth of soil. Human activities can completely change the quality of soil and soil could also become infertile.

Soil has been used for agricultural purposes even from the time that man established permanent settlements.

Use of soil for human activities has increased along with the increasing needs of man. Instead of a variety of crops, cultivation of the same crop for a long time has caused decline in bio diversity and it eventually results infertile soil.

Since soil is essential for agriculture, more attention is paid for the conservation of soil.

For free distribution

9

Soil Profile

A soil profile is the set of layers of soil that is formed over a long period of time. Such a profile in seen in figure 1.5.

Fig. 1.5 - Soil Profile

Horizon A - It consists of decayed particles and partially decayed parts of animals and plants. The parent rock had completely weathered and a large quantity of organic particles are present. It is darker than the other horizons below. This soil is called Humus.

Horizon B - Mineral salts and clay particles leach to the Horizon A and some types of clay are deposited in this layer of soil. Horizon B is relatively lighter in shade than Horizon A.

Quantity of organic matter is low in thais horizon.

Horizon C - This Horizon consists of parent rock particles and remains or particles which are brought from other substances.

Activities

01. List the factors that contribute to the formation of soil and briefly explain three of them.

02. Draw the Horizons of soil and write the features of each.

03. Explain how soil helps the survival of plants and animals.

04. List three steps which can be taken to conserve soil.

For free distribution

10

Water Resources

Water is an essential resource for the survival of man and other natural ecological systems. Man cannot live without water except for a few days. Water is a resource which contributes to human activities directly or indirectly.

Fig. 1.6 Distribution of water resources.hppt//autoflownewolt.blogspoh

Source : http://artoflonewolf.blogspot.-2015/06/17

Fig. 1.7 - Water cycleSource: http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/2015/06/16

The Earth is called the ‘Blue Planet’ because it is the only planet which has water. The Earth consists of 71.8% of water while the land area is 28.2%. This water is stored in the Oceans, seas, rivers, reservoirs, tanks and ponds. 97% of water is sea water while 03% is fresh water. Man can easily use only 01% of the water which is a small quantity. Fig. 1.3 show how water resources are distributed Fig. 1.4 shows places where water gets stored due to the water cycle as well.

For free distribution

11

Importance of water as a resource

Water is essential to man for of day to day activities, agriculture, industries and transportation. Man needs about three litters of water per day. If it could not be provided, he would be dehydrated.

Atmospheric

water

Oceanic

water

Surface

water

Soil water

Ground

water

Water is added to the environment due to evaporation and transpiration from plants and animals

Water stored in oceans and seas

Water stored in rivers, canals, snow

Water absorbed by the soil

Water from rain and irrigations which inﬁltrates into the earth and deposits on impervious rocks.(This water is used through wells and springs)

Sources of water

²Oceans

²Rain

²Internal reservoirs

² Ponds

²Ground water

aquifers

²Glaciers

²Springs

Fig. 1.8 - Importance of water as a resource

For free distribution

12

Water pollution occurs since waste water is added to rivers and streams. This contaminated water is not in a condition to be consumed by man, animals and the bio system. Thus water had become a scarce resource. It is assumed that this condition may lead to conflicts among people and nations to obtain water in the future.

Activities

1. Name three source from which man can obtain water.

2. Explain in brief, the terms, groundwater, surface water and soil water.

3. ‘Water is essential for the survival of living beings’’ state 3 facts to prove this statement.

4 . Suggest three activities that can be done to conserve the water resource.

Fores

ts

Forest is a very important eco – system.

A Forest is a land eco- system consisting of trees, climbers and plants useful to

man and animals.

Forest have been used for many purposes since past. They are naturally

grown or cultivated.

Forests vary from country to country, and from area to area according to

the nature of climate and soil. There are different kinds of forests in the world,

but we consider only there main types of forests.

²

Tropical rain forests

²

Temperate forests

²

Coniferous forests

For free distribution

13

DistributionSpecial FeaturesWildlife

² Region between tropic

of Cancer and Capricorn

² Estuary of the River

Amazon

² Central America

² The Congo basin

² Asian Region

² High bio-diversity

² Speedy growth of plants

² Several Layers of trees in

the forest

² Trees have many broad

leaves

² There are creepers and

undergrowth Epiphytes

are abundant.

² Trees

²Chimpanzee

²Tiger

²Gorilla

²Mouse deer

²Bear

²Varieties of Apes

²Serpents

²Lizards

²Reptiles

²Varieties of fish

Tropical Rain Forests

Map 1.2 - Distribution of forests in the world

like Mahogany, Ebony, Bamboo, Sandalwood, Acasia, Palms and Eucalyptus can be seen.

For free distribution

14

DistributionSpecial FeaturesWildlife ² There are evergreen and deciduous trees

² Less bio - diversity

² Hard heart wooded trees and broad leaves

² No clear layers

² Leaves fall during winter

² Trees that provide e c o n o m i c a l l y valuable timber like Oak, Chest nut, Pine, Eucalyptus Douglas Fir, Beech, Ash and Lime can be found.

²Bear

²Wolf

²Siberian Tiger

²Stag

²Varieties of birds

²Varieties of reptiles

²Deer

²Latitudinal extent of these forests are between 30o - 50o North and South.

²These forests are distributed in West and Central Europe, Eastern Coast of North America, Australia, Argentina South America and South China.

Temperate Forests

Coniferous Forests

DistributionSpecial FeaturesWildlife ²Most of the trees are conical in shape.

²Trees are well adapted to cold and dry conditions.

²Leaves are needle shaped.

²Oak, Maple, Beech, Spruce, Fir, Larch, Cedar, Poplar are trees found here.

²

²Rein deer

²Panda

²Polar bear

²Stag

²Lynxes

²Mink

²Varieties of foxes

²Seals

²Varieties of birds

²These forests can be found in areas between 50o–60o latitudes in the Northern hemisphere.

²Western coast of America to Eastern coast of North America.

²North Europe and North of Asia.Erect trunks and soft timber

For free distribution

15

Activities

01' Mark the following places in a world map. Amazon Forest, Congo Forest, Madagascar Islands, Deciduous Forest areas of Europe, Coniferous Forests of North Asia.

02' Describe two reasons for destruction of Tropical Rain Forests.

03' Explain two problems faced by forests and wildlife.

Significance of these forests

²Protection of bio-diversity.

²Protection of wild life and ensure their survival.

²They are important as catchment areas and protects the underground water.

²Provides food, medicine, timber and fuel for living beings.

²Maintaining a clean atmosphere and help to maintain environmental balance.

²Gives natural beauty.

²Affects climatic conditions.

²Reduces soil erosion and protects fertility of soil.

Problems faced by Forests and living beings

²Clearance of Forests due to needs of increasing population.

²Destruction of plants and animals due to environmental pollution.

²Collecting plants and animals for commercial purposes put them in danger of extinction.

²Breeding of invasive species of plants and animals.

²Forests are destroyed because of natural disasters and human activities (bushfires, droughts, landslides, storms, setting fire to forests.)

²Construction of roads and development projects are also causes for forest destruction.

²Many species of flora and fauna are threatened with extinction due to climatic

changes.

For free distribution

16

Assessment

1. Using relevant pictures and statements do a classification of resources .

2. Find information regarding the resource in your environment and include them in these categories.

3. List mottos about value of resources and conservation. Display them in your school premises.

4. Prepare a article for the wall paper on the topic ‘Forests are our life’.

Bibliography and Sources

²Geography Grade 11 (2014) Educational Publications Department, Colombo

²Human Geography (Part II) Educational Publications Department, Colombo.

²Bio System Technology (Part I) ^2013&" Educational Publications Department,

Colombo.

²Natural Resources of Sri Lanka (2000), National Science Foundations.

²http://artoflonewolf.blogspot.com/2015_06_17_archive.html

²http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/details.cgi?aid=30580

Glossary

²Rocks - mdIdK - £õøÓPÒ

²Minerals - Lksc - PÛ¯[PÒ

²Soil - mi - ©s

²Vegetation - jDlaI,;d - uõÁµ¨ ÷£õºøÁ

²Exhaustible resources - laIh jk iïm;a - AÈÄÖ® ÁÍ[PÒ

²Non – exhaustible resources - laIh fkdjk iïm;a - AÈÁøh¯õu ÁÍ[PÒ

For free distribution

17

²Fossil fuel - fmdis, bkaOk - E°ºa _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò

²Metal minerals - f,dayuh Lksc - E÷»õPU PÛ¯[PÒ

²Non metal mineral - wf,dayuh Lksc - E÷»õP©À»õu PÛ¯[PÒ

²Renewable resources - mqk¾ckkSh iïm;a - «Ð¸ÁõUP ÁÍ[PÒ

²Living resources - Ôù iïm;a - E°¸ÒÍ ÁÍ[PÒ

²Non Living resources - wÔù iïm;a - E°µØÓ ÁÍ[PÒ

²Tides - Woï - ÁØÖ¨ ö£¸USPÒ

²Earth's crust - mDÓú mDIAGh - ¦Â ÷©Ø£µ¨¦

²Rock composition - mdIdK ixhq;sh - £õøÓa ÷\ºUøP

²Igneous Rocks - wd.afkah mdIdK - w¨£õøÓPÒ

²Sedimentary rocks - wjidÈ; mdIdK - Aøh¯À £õøÓPÒ

²Metamorphic rocks - úmß; mdIdK - E¸©õÔ¯ £õøÓPÒ

²Crystalline rocks - iaMálrEmS mdIdK - £Î[S¨ £õøÓPÒ

²Magma - ue.aud - ©U©õ

²Heat - ;dmh - öÁ¨£®

²Pressure - mSvkh - A•UP®

²Condensation - >kSNjkh - Jk[PÀ

²Sediments - wjidÈ; - Aøh¯ÀPÒ

²Alluvial - Èh¿ - ÁshÀ

²Pottery industry - l=U,a l¾udka;h - ©m£õshU øPzöuõÈÀ

²Marble - lsß.re`v - \»øÁU PÀ

²Diamonds - Èhuka;s - øÁµ®

²Statues - m%;sud - ]ø»

²Lubricants - ,sysis øjH - ©\S Gsön´

²Casting moulds - jd;a;= wÉpq - E¸UQ ÁõºzuÀ

²Organic matter - fMkaøSh øjH - ÷\uÚ¨ ö£õ¸Ò

For free distribution

18

²Inorganic matter - wffkkaøSh øjH - A÷\uÚ¨ ö£õ¸Ò

²Iron ore - hmia - C¸®¦z uõx

²Electronic conductors - úoHq;a ikakdhl - C»zvµÛ¯À Phzv

²Decomposed matter - Ô¾KdjfYaI - E¸USø»¢u ö£õ¸Ò

²Parent rock - uõmdIdKh - uõ´¨ £õøÓ

²Deposition - ksêidokh - £iuÀ

²Soil colour - mfia j¾Kh - ©s {Ó®

²Erosion - Ldokh - vßÚÀ/ A›¨¦

²Infiltration - ldkaÿùu - FkÁiuÀ

²Drainage - c,jykh - ÁiPõ»ø©¨¦

²Moisture - f;;ukh - Dµ¨£uß

²Humus - ysHquia - EUPÀ

²Maturity - mßK;Ndjh - •xø©

²Conservation - ixrlaIKh - ÷£o¨ £õxPõzuÀ

²Soil Profile - mdxY= me;slv - ©s£UP¨ £õºøÁ

²Ground aquifer - N+.; c,Orh - uøµURÌ }÷µ¢v

²Biological system - ffcj moaO;s - E°›¯À öuõSv

²Water cycle - c,pl%h - }º Ámh®

²Evaporation - jdIamSlrKh - BÂ¯õUP®

²Transpiration - W;aiafõokh - BÂ²°º¨¦

²Springs - W,am;a - }¹ØÖ

²Environmental balance - mdßißl ;=,H;dj - ö£ÍvPa \©{ø»

²Ecological system - mßir moaO;sh - E°º `ÇÀ öuõSv

²Tropical rain forest - ksj¾;k j¾Id jkdka;r - A¯Ú ©øÇUPõk

²Temperate forests - fi!uH l,dmSh jkdka;r - CøhöÁ¨£U PõkPÒ

²Coniferous forests - fla;=Or jkdka;r - F]°ø»U PõkPÒ

For free distribution

19

²Biodiversity - ffcj úúO;ajh - E°›Ú¨ £ÀÁøPø©

²Undergrowth - háfrdamKh - RÌ {»ÁÍ›

²Evergreen - iodyß; - GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ

²Deciduous - m;kYS, - Cø»²vº

²Catchment areas - c, fmdaIl m%foaY - }÷µ¢x £SvPÒ

²Ground water store - N=.; c, .nvdj - uøµU RÌ }º÷\ª¨¦

²Bushfire - <eõ.sks - Põmkz w

²Motto - wdo¾Y mdG - Áõ\P®

²Wall paper - ì;a;s mqj;am; - _Áº uõÒ

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

20

2

Natural Resources of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka is rich with natural resources. Ocean, land, rock, soil, minerals, water and forests are important resources among them.

The aim of this chapter is to study about utilization and conservation of natural resources of Sri Lanka.

Ocean

The exact land area of Sri Lanka includes not only the land but a part of the ocean too. An International Law was implemented on the 16th of November 1994 which helps to decide the ownership of maritime boundary in a country. According to that each coastal state owns a maritime boundary less than twelve nautical miles from the coast. It is called ‘The territorial maritime boundary’.

The air, sea and all internal resources of that boundary belong to Sri Lanka. This area which has islands , lagoons, head lands, bays, coral reefs, sand and rocks is very useful for the fishing industry and the tourism industry.

The zone between 12 -24 Nautical miles is called the 'Contiguous Zone’. The government has the right to punish and take actions against the violation of laws in customs , fishing , migrations and sanitary laws within this zone.

The Zone between 24 – 200 Nautical miles is called the ‘Exclusive Economic Zone’. Living and non living natural resources, the sea bed and water particles of that area belong to Sri Lanka.

Other than the above maritime boundaries, Mannar strait, Palk strait, Bay of Bengal which belong to Historic waters (Internal waters) are divided between Sri Lanka and India by an agreement. All activities in this zone are taken place with the agreement of both parties.

For free distribution

21

Fig. 2.1 Territorial maritime boundary

Activities

01. Name the main natural resources of Sri Lanka.

02. Explain the term, ‘Territorial maritime boundary.’

03.‘The ocean around Sri Lanka is a valuable natural resource’.Explain with

examples. Land

‘Land’ is also a very significant natural resource of Sri Lanka. The land area of Sri Lanka is 65610 km2 including the islands around it. The land is utilized

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

22

Fig. 2.2- Different ways the land is used

according to the variation of physical features such as Topography climate, natural vegetation and water resources. Settlements, home gardens, roads, agricultural crop lands, forests, shrub land and internal reservoirs are such examples.

Study figure 2.2 and identify how the land of Sri Lanka is utilized in different ways.

There are several main zones in Sri Lanka with a significant variation of the physical features of the land and the specific features pertaining to these areas could also be identified. Massive paddy fields and the irrigation systems in the dry zone, tea estates and the terraced paddy cultivation in the central hills, massive buildings with many storeys and the road systems in the urban lands , fishing industry in the coastal areas are examples for those specific features.

For free distribution

23

²Biological resources are destructed because of deforestation and clearing of slopes.

²Flooding due to filling of low lands and obstruction of drainage systems.

²Filling of reservoirs.

²Destruction of coastal eco system .

²Environmental , health and sanitary problems in the urban areas.

² Planning of land utilization policies. ² Planning the towns and cities in a methodical way. ² Cultivating environmental friendly crops. ² Use new protective cultivation methods such as ‘SALT’. ² Replanting forests. ² Creating coastal boundaries and implementing laws related to them. ² Banning removal of corals. ² Carrying out public awareness programmes.

ProblemMethods of conservation of land

Problems related to utilization of land in Sri Lanka and methods of conservation of land

Activities

01. Explain briefly how land in Sri Lanka is utilized in different ways.

02. Explain the significance of land as a resource.

Rocks

Land of Sri Lanka consists of Igneous, Sedimentary and Metamorphic rocks. These rocks are used for many purposes since past. When granite metamorphoses, it turns into gneiss. They are used in construction of buildings and roads. Hard gneiss was used for construction of stair ways, guard stones and pillars in religious buildings of Anuradhapura, Mihintale etc. Hard gneiss was also used in sculpting Samadhi and Aukana Buddha statue. Miocene limestone is a sedimentary rock spread along the Jaffna Peninsula and the Northwestern coast. It is used for production of cement, to smelt iron ore and to construct buildings. Corals of the South Western coast are used for

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

24

producing lime. Dolomite, a metamorphic rock in Matale, Kandy, Balangoda, Nalanda, Digana and Habarana is used as a fertilizer. It is also used in glass and ceramic industries and it is also used to produce lime needed to construct buildings.

Problems in utilization of rocks.

²Environmental pollution due to excavation and transportation of rocks.

²Coastal erosion and the flooding caused by sea.

²Occurrence of landslides and cracks on buildings caused by vibrations during excavations.

²Barren lands which are unsuitable for cultivation.

Soil of Sri Lanka

Soil is formed by weathering of parent rocks and decomposition of animal and plant matter. Factors such as climate, parent rock, vegetation cover and slope land areas are important in the formation of soil. The quantity of rainfall and the period of receiving rainfall are the most important factors that help in the development process of soil in Sri Lanka. Constant rainfall and high temperature expedite the weathering process of rocks. Although Sri Lanka is a small island, a number of soil types are found due to the influence of various factors. In this chapter we discuss seven main soil Groups in Sri Lanka.

²Red brown soil

²Non calcareous brown soil

²Reddish brown latosol soil

²Red yellow podzolic soil

²Red yellow latosol soil

²Alluvial soil

²Solidex and Solonetz soil.

Fig. 2.3 Different varieties of rocks

GneissLimestoneCoralsDolomite

For free distribution

25

Map 2.1 - Distribution of soils in Sri Lanka

How to use the soil:

²Red brown soil - It is found only in the Dry Zone and is suitable for cultivation of dry crops and Chena cultivation

²Non calcareous brown soil - It is found in the interior areas of Ampara , Batticaloa and in the coastal areas. This is more suitable for the cultivation of grains, vegetables and grasses.

²Reddish brown laterite soil - It is commonly found in the Wet Zone. This is more suitable for the cultivation of tea, rubber, coffee, cocoa, cardamoms, cloves and fruits.

²Red yellow podzolic soil - This soil is found in the districts that belong to the low country wet zone. Tea, rubber, coconut are some permanent crops which can be grown in this area. This is also suitable for growing vegetables and fruits.

²Red yellow latosol soil - This can be seen in the land area from Putalam to Mullaitivu along the North Western coast of the Dry Zone, and in the Jaffna peninsula. This could be made suitable for fruit cultivation successfully with the use of fertilizers and proper water supply.

²Alluvial soil - It is spread in river valleys and areas around them in the wet and dry zones. It is commonly used for paddy cultivation.

²Solidex and Solonetz Soil - This kind of soil is abundantly found in areas such as Damana and Tamankaduwa. Suitable for paddy and grasses.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

26

Activities

01. List the main kinds of rocks and write two examples for each type.

02. Name the main categories of soil in Sri Lanka and make a list of crops

that can be grown in each type of soil.

03. Mark the areas where those varieties of soil are spread in a map of Sri Lanka.

Problems in utilization of soil and methods of conservation

²Severe soil erosion. ²Salinity of soil. ²Reduction of the capacity to retain water in soil. ²Reduction of fertility due to over exposure of land. ²Land degradation due to chemical Fertilizers, pesticides and weedicides. ²Occurrence of natural disasters such as floods and landslides. ²Effect on the ground water stores. ²Soil organisms get destroyed.

²Select crops following the agricultural principles and manage accordingly. ²Regulating the use of fertilizer and improving the consumption of organic fertilizers. ²Cultivating cover crops. ²Turn over the soil according to contour lines in slopes. ²Stripe cultivation method. ²Use crop residues as fertilizer. ²Use block and spill drains slit drains and green fence. And the use of stone ridges.

ProblemsMethods of conservation of soil.

Minerals

Mineral resources can be introduced as a gift of nature. Graphite, gems, clay, limestone and mineral sand are the main kinds of mineral in Sri Lanka.

These minerals and the products related to them are used at different occasions in day to day life. Fig 2.4 shows some of the goods produced using these minerals.

For free distribution

27

Fig. 2 .4 - Products related to minerals.

Mineral resources in Sri Lanka are of two categories. They are Metal minerals and Non - metal minerals.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

28

Graphite

Sri Lanka is famous for high quality graphite since past. Graphite is mainly exported and is used in following local industries.

²To produce paints

²To make casting moulds

²To plate ovens

²In the printing industry

²Used in electric and electronic industry

²To produce pencils

²To produce explosives

Kahatagaha and Kolongaha in Kurunegala district and Bogala in Kegalle district are two main areas in Sri Lanka where graphite is found. Kolonne, Bothale, Meegoda, Kahatagasdigiliya, Kebithigollawa, Akuressa, Batapola and Deniyaya are the other areas where graphite is found.

Fig. 2 .2 - The distribution of graphite and gems in Sri Lanka

Gems

Sri Lanka is famous for gems since ancient times and it is the type of material that brings in the largest amount of foreign currency to Sri Lanka. Gems are unique because of their lustre, colour and hardness. Sri Lanka has different varieties of gems such as rubies, sapphires , cat’s eye, tourmaline etc. Which are highly valuable. Uses of gems are;

²Used in making jewellery

² Making watch bearings

²Making ornaments.

For free distribution

29

Activities

01. Mark three areas where gems and graphite are distributed in a map of Sri Lanka marked with district boundaries.

02. Name the industries related to gems and graphite industry and state the benefits we can get by developing those industries.

Mineral sands

Mineral sands used as raw materials for different industries are found in abundance in the coastal areas and river banks in Sri Lanka. Silica, Ilmenite, Zircon and Rutile are some of the important mineral sands.

Fig. 2.2 - Distributing of mineral sands

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

30

Activities

01. Name four types of mineral sands in Sri Lanka.

02. Mark and name the areas where they are spread in a map of Sri Lanka.

03. Cite with examples and explain the importance of mineral sands as an industrial raw material in Sri Lanka.

Problems in utilization of Mineral resources

²Environment pollution due to technical methods used in mining mineral resources. ²Sand mining in river valleys would cause erosion of river banks, floods, destruction of cultivation due to flow of salinized water to the interior of the country. ²Pits are created due to mining and earth slips and landslides may occur too. ²Unused pits filled with water for a long time become breeding grounds for mosquitos and bacteria. ²Floods occur due to deposition of sediments in rivers and lakes. ²Mining can be harmful to trees and plants in the environment, destruction of cultivated lands, water, land and air pollution. ²Destruction of aquatic organisms and soil organisms.

Conservation of Mineral resources

Mineral resources should be conserved because they are exhaustible resources. Steps taken to conserve mineral resources are as follows:

²Issuing of licenses to regularize mineral mining.

²Taking the maximum use of the resources available.

²Regularizing laws for mining, using and transportation of minerals.

²Minimizing wastage when mining.

²Exploring to discover potential mineral resources.

²Improving efficiency in technology.

Activities

01. Name the minerals used as industrial raw materials in Sri Lanka.

02.‘Mineral is a resource that should be conserved” . Give reasons for that.

For free distribution

31

Water

Sri Lanka is a country with abundant water resources. Sources of water in Sri Lanka are mainly fed by rainfall. Sri Lanka receives rainfall from monsoons, convectional rain and cyclones. The map in figure 2.4 shows the distribution of average annual rainfall in Sri Lanka. It clearly shows that the amount of rainfall varies in different places.

Map 2.4 - Distribution of rainfall in Sri Lanka.

Main water resources in Sri Lanka are, ²Rivers, streams ²Tanks, reservoirs ²ground water (wells, springs, tube wells)

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

32

Rivers, streams and canals

Even though Sri Lanka is a small island, it has about 103 river valleys (Map 2.5). Water from these rivers is utilized to fulfil the basic water requirements of the country. The earliest settlements were established in these river valleys to obtain water for their needs.

Tanks and reservoirs

Attention was paid on irrigation in the dry zone, even in the ancient times, due to instability of rainfall and drying up of the rivers during the dry season. Map 2.5 - Rivers in Sri Lanka

Many tanks were constructed in the Dry Zone in Sri Lanka as a solution for the scarcity of water. Water collected during the rainy season in these tanks is used during the dry season. Minneriya , Kavudulla, Parakrama Samudra, Yoda wewa, Kala wewa and Nachchaduwa are examples for some of the tanks in the dry zone. These tanks fulfill the water requirements in those areas even at present.

Large reservoirs were constructed in the hill country wet zone during recent times. Kothmale, Victoria, Randenigala and Rantambe are some of them. Water in these reservoirs is not only used for agriculture, but for many other purposes as well.

For free distribution

33

Ground water

Ground water is important in districts such as Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Mannar, and Puttalam in Sri Lanka. Limestone deposits of these areas can retain a large quantity of ground water. Ground water exists as deep basins. Vanathavilluwa and Murukkan basins are the largest ground water deposits in the island. Ground water can be utilized by agri wells, tube wells and Andiya wells (a well with a counterpoise bucket lift. They are also known as "sweep well.)

Uses of water

²For drinking and household consumption.

²Generation of hydro – electricity.

²In agriculture.

²For recreational activities

²For industrial productions.

²As a medium of transport.

²For the fishing industry.

²To protect the balance of nature and to control the temperature.

Problems in utilization of water

²Water is a scarce resource.

²Waste of water.

²Pollution of water due to agriculture and industrial waste.

²Scarcity of pure drinking water.

²Breeding of pathogenic organisms in contaminated water.

²Problems in distribution of water during droughts.

²Pollution of water sources, salinization.

²Drying of springs, water pollution in tube wells.

Methods of conservation of water sources

²Implement water management plans.

²Use water sparingly and minimize wastage.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

34

²Protect water sources in the catchment areas.

²Construct large tanks and reservoirs.

²Provide proper irrigation to agricultural lands.

²Use of rainwater tanks. (Rainwater harvesting)

²Recycle water.

²Make people aware of the value of water.

²Minimize water pollution.

² Regularize the method of releasing waste matter into the waterways

²Controlling floods.

²Design equipment like taps in a suitable way to help conservation of water.

Activities

01. Following are 10 main river valleys in Sri Lanka. Mark and name them in a map of Sri Lanka.

Mahaweli river Yan Oya Kelani river Walawe River

Deduru Oya Kumbukkan Oya Kalu ganga Ginganga

Malwatu Oya Maduru oya

02. Explain the statement, “Water is an essential resource for survival of the living organisms.

Forests in Sri Lanka

Many sub systems can be identified when we study the forests in Sri Lanka. Following are those sub systems of forests. ²Tropical Rain Forests ²Dry Mixed Evergreen Forests ²Intermediate Evergreen Forests ²Montane Dry Zone Forests ²Montane Wet Zone Forests ²Thorn and Scrubland (Arid Zone Forests) ²Mangroves

For free distribution

35

Fig. 2.5 – Distribution of forests in Sri Lanka

Fig. 2.6 - Tropical Rain Forests

Tropical Rain Forests

²Distributed in the lower areas of the wet zone and in the hill country of Sri Lanka . Dediyagala, Kanneliya, Nakiyadeniya, Ruhunu Kanda, Gilimale, Erathna and Morapitiya are areas where these kinds of forests are found.

²Constant rainfall and a temperature favourable for the growth of plants throughout the year is a special feature in these forests. ²Forests are dark green in colour and trees are found in different layers. Under growth is abundant. Hard wood trees can also be seen among the other common trees. ²Hora, Keena, Godapara, Kirihembiliya, Batu Na, Milla, Midella Nedun, Davata are some of the common trees in these forests.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

36

Fig. 2.7 - Dry Mixed Ever Green Forests

Fig. 2.8 - Montane wetzone Forests

Dry Mixed Evergreen Forests ²Distributed mainly in the dry zone ²The main rainy season is Northeast monsoon and trees grow during that period. ²As trees grow during the rainy season and in certain kinds of trees, leaves fall during the dry season, these forests are Deciduous Forests. ²Trees of economic value such as Satinwood, Ebony, Milla, Suriyamara, Teak and Halmilla can be seen in these forests in abundance.

Intermediate Evergreen Forests ²Spreads along the transitional zone which separates the wet and dry zone. ²Trees of dry and wet zone are mixed up. ²The predominant types of trees are Jak, Bedidel, Pihimbiya, Mahogany, Lunumidella.

Montane Wet Zone Forests ²Distributed in hill country wet zone above 1200 m in height. Samanala, Pidurutalagala, Horton plain, Knuckles are some of the areas where these forests are found. ²Height of trees gradually decreases according to the altitude of the land. Tree tops grow as a canopy. Trees do not grow thickly. Epiphytes are abundant on tree trunks.

²Sapu, Keena, Mihiriya, Waldel, Vellan, Mora, Hulan hik are some of the predominant types of trees in these forests.

Montane Dry Zone Forests ²Distributed in hilly areas over 1400m in height. ²Horton plains, Moon plains, Seethaeliya, Ambewela, Kandapola are some of the areas these forests are found in abundance. ²A significant feature is 'Patanas' or grasslands as a result of less rainfall. The

For free distribution

37

Fig. 2.9 - Montane Dry Zone Forests

Fig. 2.10 - Thorn and Scrubland

Fig. 2.11 - Mangroves

trunks and the branches of the trees are twisted so that they are resistant to strong winds prevalent in these areas. Trees are scattered about in the grasslands. ²Maharathamal, Aralu, Bula, Nelli, Domba, Gurukeena and Kahata are some predominant types of trees found in these forests.

Thorn and Scrubland

²These are found in the Northwestern and South Eastern regions.

²The average temperature is above 27c. Therefore plants are adapted to withstand droughts. Thorny trees with pointed and thick leaves can be seen (cactus).

²Palu, Weera, Eraminiya, Karamba, Suriya are examples for the types of trees that can be seen in abundance in these forests.

Mangroves

²These are distributed in the coastal areas near rivers, river mouths and lagoons.

²A distinctive feature of mangroves is their far-reaching, exposed roots.

²Kadol, Kirala, Diyakaduru, Ginpol are some species of trees abundantly found.

Wildlife reserves

Animals in the forests are an important part of the bio-diversity. Forest reserves are declared to protect eco systems and fauna, to preserve natural beauty

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

38

and to provide opportunities for scientific research. Following are some types of reserves.

² National Parks • Strict natural reserves

²Sanctuaries • Natural reserves

²Forest reserves

National Parks

There are about 20 national parks in Sri Lanka. Yala, Wilpattu, Gal oya, Kumana, Udawalawa, Vasgamuwa, Lunugam Vehera, Maduru Oya, Somawathie, Horton Plains, Bundala, Minneriya are some of them. The wildlife is completely protected in these national parks. The public can observe the wildlife and the natural environment. Provisions for scientific study are also provided.

Strict Natural Reserves

Haggala, Yala and Ritigala are three of the strict natural reserves. Human activities are restricted in these reserves. Wildlife resources are solely owned by the government and the public is permitted to enter these areas only for scientific research purposes.

Sanctuaries

It is an area reserved for the protection of wildlife. There are about 62 sanctuaries in Sri Lanka. Weeravilla, Kataragama, Kaudulla, Minneriya, Udawatta Kale, Wilapattu, Gal Oya, Trincomalee, Madhu road, Ravana Ella, Victoria, Randenigala, Rantambe, Sigiriya, Bellanvilla, Madunagala are some of the main sanctuaries in Sri Lanka. Sanctuaries are not under severe restrictions. Human activities are permitted in such a way to protect wildlife and their natural habitats.

Nature Reserves

Thriconamadhu, Minneriya, Giritale, Wetahiriyakanda are some of the Nature Reserves in Sri Lanka. The government assures protection of living and non- living resources in these areas. Public cannot enter these areas without permission of the government.

Forest Reserves

Knuckles, Sinharaja, Kanneliya, Dediyagala and Nakiyadeniya are some of the main forest reserves.

For free distribution

39

Fig. 2.6 - Forest Reserves in Sri Lanka

Source - The National Map collection of Sri Lanka 2007

(Naval Base)

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

40

Uses of forests and forest reserves

²They protect bio- diversity.

²Provides a sanctuary for wildlife.

²Provides an opportunity for the public to observe rare wildlife.

²Springs and catchment areas are conserved.

²Prevent the increase of environmental temperature.

²They act as a gene pool.

²It is a source that provides food and medicine.

²Provide commercial products such as resin, wax, paraffin, kithul treackle and bee honey.

²Prevent environment pollution.

²Absorb Carbon dioxide.

²Provision of timber to build houses and to make furniture. Provide firewood to be used as a fuel.

²Give shade, coolness, beautify nature and give mental relief.

²Act as a buffer for soil erosion and conserve soil.

²Storms, earth slips and floods are controlled.

Activities

01' Mark and name two National parks, Strict Natural Reserves, Sanctuaries, Natural reserves and Forest reserves in a map of Sri Lanka.

02' Create a folder about forests in Sri Lanka under the following topics.

²Distribution of forests ²Nature of trees and plants ²Significance of forests and wildlife in Sri Lanka

Steps taken to conserve forests

Threats to the existence of forests have increased in line with increase in population and their escalating needs. Deforestation that occur along with the increase in population has adverse effects on climate, environment, and human life and on wild life too. Therefore following steps were taken to conserve forests and wild life.

For free distribution

41

Graph 2.1 - Use of Energy use in Sri LankaSource - http://www.info.energy.gov.lk/2015/04/23

²Maintaining National Reserves and Sanctuaries.

²Implementing forest plantation projects.

²Following forest conservation strategies (SALT method, conserve wet lands, conserve mangroves).

²Encouraging public participation in a forestation.

²Planting trees and increase the productivity of forests.

²Making people aware of the effects of destruction of forests.

²Maintenance of Environmentally Sensitive Zones.

²Protecting forest resources and enforcing the existing laws.

Energy Power

There are several sources used to generate energy power,

²Bio- mass ²Imported petroleum ² Water ²Coal ²Wind ²Solar energy

Graph 2.1 shows how these sources of power produce energy in Sri Lanka. According to the graph; it is evident that bio-mass and petroleum are used more than the other sources of energy.

Bio- mass

Timber, Agri waste, animal waste and bio gas are the main bio-mass energy sources used in Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka uses fire wood in abundance like many of the other developing countries. Fire wood from home gardens, fire wood from coconut cultivations, rubber wood, wood from natural forests and forest cultivations are used as fuel. Other than the above sources, saw dust, paddy husks, fiber waste of sugarcane, charcoal and charcoal obtained from coconut shells are also used as fuel.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

42

Fig. 2.12 - Solar panel

Fig. 2.13 - Wind Mills

Solar energy

Solar energy can be produced easily in Sri Lanka as it is located in the tropical region which gets constant sun light. Sri Lanka has recently established a solar power station at Baruthakanda in Hambanthota .Other than that solar cells and solar panels are used for producing energy for domestic use. The high capital required to be invested initially to obtain solar power is a challenge to a developing country like Sri Lanka. However it is a source of energy which immensely helps to reduce environmental pollution.

Wind energy Wind is an important source of energy as it is a non-exhaustible resource. Similar to the way of utilizing solar energy wind power too requires a higher initial capital. But it causes the minimum level of environmental pollution. Puttalam and Hambanthota are the areas where wind power stations are located in Sri Lanka.They supply power to small scale industries

Petroleum

Petroleum is an important source of energy which is imported. Imported crude oil is being purified at Sapugakanda and is distributed throughout the country by the Kolonnawa stores. Petrol, Diesel, L.P. Gas, Jet fuel, Fuel oil and Kerosene oil are extracted from crude oil. Graph 2.2 shows how petroleum is consumed in Sri Lanka. According to this graph it is clear that petroleum is used mostly in transportation, industries and commercial activities.

For free distribution

43

Graph 2.2 - Use of petroleumSource - Anuual report 2013 Ministry of Finance and Planning

The demand for energy is increasing day by day in Sri Lanka. "Sustainable Energy Authority" is established to fulfil this demand and to concentrate on producing low cost energy generation. Attention is paid to establish small scale energy projects in the rural areas. In addition to the above, energy power is produced at the coal power stations in Kerawalaptiya and Norochcholai.

Hydro electricity

Hydro electricity is mostly used for domestic, industrial and commercial activities in Sri Lanka. Only 2000 mega watts can be produced in hydro power stations in Sri Lanka. Lakshapana,Wimalasurendra, Samanala, Canyon, Randenigala, Kothmale, Victoria, Ukuwela are some hydro power stations which produce 1200 mega watts up to now.

The demand for electricity increases annually by 7% - 8% in Sri Lanka. Increase in the population, rise in consumer needs and development in industries have affected this increase in demand for energy. Graph 2.2 shows the consumption of electricity in Sri Lanka. According to this graph, there is a high demand for domestic activities and industries.Graph 2.3 - Use of hydro power

Source - http://www.info.energy.gov.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

44

Source - Gunasena Philhips Atlas (2003)Fig. 2.7 - Hydro Power Station in Sri Lanka

For free distribution

45

Problems in consumption of energy sources

²High cost.

²Some of the energy sources like wind and solar power depends on environmental factors and a high initial cost has to be spent.

²A high cost is spent for importing crude oil.

²More wastage in consumption of energy.

²Breakdowns due to natural hazards.

Importance of the conservation of energy resources

²Saves foreign currency that we spend on importing crude oil.

²Contribution to the development of the country.

²Contribution to the education and social activities.

²Consumption of energy sources sparingly would help to fulfill high demands. It would also contribute towards sustainable development.

²Efficiency in daily activities of the consumers saves time and minimizes the waste of money.

²Minimize environmental destruction.

²Minimize the effects of natural hazards and climatic changes.

Activity

1. Name three energy sources used mostly in Sri Lanka.

2. Mark and name the following things on a map of Sri Lanka.

²Five main hydro power stations

²Two wind power stations

²A coal power station

3. “We can contribute to the development of the country by using energy power sparingly” Explain this statement with examples.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

46

Assignments

1. List three problems related to consumption of land in your area.

2. Design a leaflet including methods that can be followed to solve those problems.

3. (i) Name some of the mineral resources in your area and prepare a table and write their uses.

(ii) Find information about the advance effects of extracting and using those mineral resources on the environment.

4. (i) Collect data on problems related to consumption of water in your area.

(ii) Suggest remedies to solve those problems.

5. Plan and implement an activity to use the water wasted in the school premises with the help of your teacher.

6. (i) To which sub system are the forests in your area belong?

(ii) Write three special features of those forests.

7. Collect data on natural resources in your area. Make a handout to show the uses gained at present and uses that can be gained in future.

Bibliography and sources

².=Kfiak ms,smaia f,dal is;shï fmd; ^2003& iS$i weï' ã' .=Kfiak iy iud.u ²Annual Report (2013), Ministry of Finance and Planning ²http: //www.info.energy.gov.lk ²Y%S ,xld cd;sl is;shï ix.%yh" 2007" Y%S ,xld ñkskafodare fomd¾;fïka;=j" fld<U' ²n,Yla;sh oefha Ôjkd,sh hs .%ka:h ^2015&" iqks;H n,Yla;s wêldßh

Glossary

²Maritime boundary - uqyqÿ iSudj - PhÀ GÀø»

²Nautical miles - kdúl ie;mqï - PhÀ ø©À

²Territorial Maritime boundary - rdIaà%h uqyqÿ iSudj - Bm¦» PhÀ GÀø»

For free distribution

47

²Historic waters - ft;sydisl c, m%foaYh - Áµ»õØÖ }öµÀø»

²Land use - N+ñ mßyrKh - {»¨ £¯ß£õk

²Consumption patterns - mßyrK rgd - ~PºÄ¨ £õ[SPÒ

²Scrub lands - ,÷ le<E - £ØøÓU PõkPÒ

²Terraced method - fy,au¿ l%uh - £iUPmk •øÓ

²Corals - fldr,a - •¸øPU PÀ

²Coral reefs - ysß.,a mr - •¸øPU PØ£õº

²Replant - m%;sfrdamKh - «ß |køP

²Steps - msh.egfm< - £iUPmkPÒ

²Guard stones - fodrgqmd, rEm - PõÁÀ PÀ

²Miocene limestones - ufhdaiSk yqKq.,a - ©÷¯õ^ß _snU PÀ

²Rock excavation - mdIdK lekSu - £õøÓ APÌÄ

²Vibration - lïmkh - AvºÄ

²Soil development process - mdxY= j¾Ok l%shdj,sh - ©s Â¸zva ö\¯ß•øÓ

²River valley - .x.d ñáhdj; - BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS

²River mouth - .xfudah - BØÖ •P®

²Cover crop - wdjrK fNda. - ‰k £°º

²Stripe cultivation method - ;Sre j.d l%uh - £iUPmk £°ºaö\´øP •øÓ

²Block drain mowing - l=Üá ldKq lemSu - PõÀÁõ¯ öÁmkuÀ

²Copper - ;U - ö\®¦

²Magnesium - ue.akSishï - ©UÜ]¯®

²Ilmenite - b,aukhsÜ - CÀ©øÚØ

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

48

²Rutile - rEghs,a - ¹øh°À

²Magnetite - ue.akghsÜ - ©UÚøµØÖ

²Graphite - ñksrka - PõŸ¯®

²Limestone - yqKq.,a - _snU PÀ

²Clay - ueá - PÎ©s

²Apatite - wemghsÜ - A¨£øuØ

²Silica - is,sld - ]¼UPõ

²Sediments / silt - frdka uv - Aøh¯ÀPÒ

²Aquatic organisms - c,c Ôùka - }º\õº A[QPÒ

²Soil organisms - mdxY= Ôùka - ©s A[QPÒ

²Water basins - c,føda‚ - }º Ái{»®

²Tube wells - k, <sx - SÇõ´ QnÖ

²Sweep wells / Andia wells - wdçhd <sx - BÇ©ØÓ QnÖPÒ

²Tropical rain forests - ksj¾;k f;;a jkdka;r - A¯Ú ©øÇU PõkPÒ

²Dry mixed ever green forests - úh<s ñY% iodyß; jkdka;r - GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ Áµsh

P»¨¦U PõkPÒ

²Intermediate evergreen forests - w;rueÈ iodyß; jkdka;r - GßÖ® £_ø©¯õÚ

Cøh{ø»U PõkPÒ

²Montane dry zone forests - l÷lr úh<s l,dmSh jkdka;r - ö©õ¢uõøÚ E»º Á»¯U

PõkPÒ

²Wet montane forests - l÷lr f;;a l,dmSh jkdka;r - Dµ ö©õ¢uõøÚU PõkPÒ

²Thorny bushes and scrublands - lgq m÷re yd ,÷ le<E - •m¦uºPÐ®, £ØøÓU

PõkPÐ®

For free distribution

49

²Mangroves - lfvd,dk - PshÀPÒ

²Rainy season - j¾Id iD;=j - ©øÇ¨ £¸Á®

²Transitional Zone - l%dka;s l,dmh - ©õÓÀ Á»¯®

²National park - cd;sl WoHdkh - ÷u]¯ §[Põ

²Strict natural reserve areas - oeä iajdNdúl rlaIs; - uøhö\´¯¨£mh JxUS¨ £SvPÒ

²Sanctuary - wNhN+ñh - \µnõ»¯®

²Natural reserves - iajdNdúl rlaIs; - C¯ØøP JxUSPÒ

²Forest reserves - jk rlaIs; - ÁÚ JxUS

²Gene pool - cdk ixÑ; - ©µ£q

²Storms - iq<x l=Kdgq - ¦¯ÀPÒ

²Tree culture - rela frdamKh - ©µ|køP

²Environmentally sensitive zones - mßir ixfõ§ l,dm - `ÇÀ EnºvÓß Á»¯®

²Bio mass - ffcj ialkaO - E°º voÄ

²Solar energy - iQ¾h Yla;sh - `›¯ \Uv

²Solar power stations - iQ¾h n,d.dr - `›¯ Á¾ {ø»¯®

²Solar cells - iQ¾h fldaI - `›¯U P»[PÒ

²Solar panel - iQ¾h mek,h - `›¯ öuõSv

²Generation of electricity - úÿ,sh ckkh lsÍu - ªß E¸ÁõUP®

²Energy Authority - n,Yla;s wêldßh - ªß \Uv BønU SÊ

²Coal power station - .,a wÕ=re n,d.drh - {»UP› Á¾ {ø»¯®

²Sustainable existence - ;srir meje;au - {ø»¯õÚ ÁõÌÄ vÓß

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

50

Scientific names of the trees in Sri Lankan forests mentioned in Unit 2

²Hora - Dipterocarpus zeylanicus

²Keena - Callophylum tomentosum

²Halmilla - Berrya cordifolia

²Kirihambiliya - Palaquium grande

²Milla - Vitex altissima

²Nadun - Pericopsis mooniana

²Pihibiya - Filicium decipiens

²Lunumidella - Melia azedarach

²Sapu - Michelia champaca

²Nelli - Phyllanthus emblica

²Palu - Manilkara hexandra

²Karamba - Carissa carandas

²Suriya - Thespesia populnea

²Eraminiya - Ziziphus rugosa

²Mora - Dimocarpus longan

²Kaluwara - Diospyrus ebenum

²Burutha - Chloroxylon swietenia

²Teak - Tectonia grandis

²Suriya mara - Albizia odoratissima

²Badi del - Artocarpus nobilis

²Hulan hik - Chukrasia tabularis

²Mihiriya - Gordonia ceylanica

²Maha rath mal - Rhodendron arboreum

For free distribution

51

²Aralu - Terminalia chebula

²Bulu - Terminalia bellirica

²Domba - Callophylum innophylum

²Guru keena - Calophyllum calaba

²Kadol - Rhizophora mucronata

²Kirala - Sonneratia caseolaris

²Diya kaduru - Cerbera manghas

²Gin pol - Nypa futicans

²Welan - Pterospermum suberifolium

²Midella - Barringtonia racemosa

²Dawata - Carallia brachiata

²Kahata - Careya arborea

²Veera - Drypetes sepiaria

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

52

The World Population

3

The total number of humans inhabiting the earth is termed population

Population is defined as a phenomenon that changes qualitatively and quantitatively.

The main objective of this lesson is to find out information regarding the

size of population, its growth and distribution.

When population is considered two important aspects can be identified,

²Features such as gender, human race and age that receive at birth. ²Features such as nationality, religion, language and literacy that are received later.

Man who determines or consumes all physical resources on the earth is a resource. Accordingly, in any country human resource is very important within the development process. It is so because all activities of the world is based on man. The population of the world is growing fast. The accelerated growth of population in some countries is a problem and in others, the lower growth of population is also a problem. In developing countries the growth of population is relatively faster than in developed countries. Hence it is important that the population has to be

Fig. 3.1 - Population

For free distribution

53

maintained at the optimum level in any country, within the development process. For this purpose, it is seen that in every country, various strategies and plans are prepared and also population polices are followed. Hence “population” has become a very important topic in geographical studies.

The size of world population

Over 200 years ago, the world population has been very low, however, at present the world population has risen beyond seven billion. Gradually according to the rate that population growth increases, it can be calculated that around 80 million people would be added to the world population.

Source – http://world population rewiew.com/continents 2014.12.03

Graph 3.1 Shows the distribution of population in the continents. According to this graph;

²around 76%of the total world population lives in the two continents of Asia and Africa. 24%, comprising the rest, is distributed among other countries. There are around 23 countries which have a population of over a 100 million. The 10 countries which have the largest populations is shown in table 3.1.

²China and India in Asia are homes to a huge population. Besides, high populations are found in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indonesia.

Graph 3.1 The World Population size (prepared according to continents)

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

54

Table -3.1 Population according to the numerical strength

Country Population Percentage China

India

U.S.A

Indonesia

Brazil

Pakistan

Nigeria

Bangladesh

Russia

Japan

1"393"783"836

1"267"401"849

322"583"006

252"812"245

202"033"670

185"132"926

178"516"904

158"512"570

142"467"651

126"999"808

19'24

17'50

4'45

3'49

2'79

2'56

2'46

2'19

1'97

1'75

Source - http://www.worldometers.info/2015.07.20

The Growth of World Population

Though the history of human race that inhabited the world runs to over a million years, definite data about population have not been found prior to last 200 years.

Some conclusions have been arrived at, by means of archaeological evidence about the early period. Even during this period by examining the data it becomes clear that there has been a continuous growth of the world population.

When the historical data regarding world population, two distinguishable periods can be identified.

1. A long period of time between the origin of mankind to around 1750 when the growth was slow.

During a long period of time due to the rate of natural growth being at a low level, the world population did not develop fast. The reason behind this is the fact that though the birth ratio was high, the mortality ratio too remained high. See graph 3.2.

For free distribution

55

Within the short period after 1750 AD, There was an accelerated growth of population. During this period of time the mortality rate became low but the birth rate remained high, leading to an accelerated growth in population. This is known as the population explosion.

YearPopulation in millions17501800185019001950197519851995200620092011

7001"0001"2001"6002"5504"0004"8505"7006"5006"8007"000

Source – http://geography.about.com 2015.07.22

Graph 3.2 - How world population grew

Source - http://singularity.com/wp/_contend/uphold/2011/09/image2.jpg 2015.07

Table 3.2 Rapid Growth in Population

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

56

The world population which was a billion in 1800 had reached seven billionin AD in 2011. According to graph 3.3 it is clear, that gradually the time taken for growth of population to near a billion became less and at the present time it has only taken a short period of time like 12 years for the population to double. It is expected for the world population to reach 11 billion at the end of this century.

Graph 3.4 Growth of world Population

Source - http://www.sustainablescale.org/images/ 2015.07.20

Graph 3.3 – The time taken for the growth of world population from billion to billion

Source - http://www.usfunds.com/media/images 2014.12.06

Another special feature of the growth of world population is the fact that during the period after 1950, the population growth in developing countries shows a faster rate than the developed countries (graph 3.4).

For free distribution

57

Population that inhabits a certain unit of land is defined as population density. Generally it is shown as “number of people per square kilometre”. Population density = Population Land area

Activities

01' i' Name the two identifiable periods in the growth of world population.

ii' Explain clearly the factors that led to the differences in population growth during those two periods.

02' i' State what is meant by “Population explosion” explain the factors that affected the “population explosion” in developing countries. ii' Study graph 3.4 and explain the differences between the population growth in developed and developing countries.

Distribution of World Population

How humans have spread geographically on the surface of the earth is known as population distribution. There are only a few regions on the earth which are physically congenial to human habitation. Due to the diversity in physical and human factors and unequal distribution is visible. Accordingly, there are densely populated regions and sparsely populated regions on the earth’s surface.

Four densely populated regions can be identified ² East Asia ² South and South East Asia ² North West Europe

² North East Costal Zone of U.S.A The North Eastern coastal zone of the U.S.A which is identified as a densely populated region has become a secondary concentration at world level at present. All these population concentration, being found in coastal regions is a special feature. There are factors which contribute towards this feature of people crowding into these places. Physical surroundings congenial to human habitation, transport facilities and factors that are suitable for trade and other economic activities are some of those factors that have made people crowd to those places. A large number of million cities (cities that have a population over a million) are located within these zones.

It is only 10% of the land of the world that cover this population concentration but that 64% of the world population live within these concentrations is a special feature.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

58

World Population distribution

Map 3.1- World Population distribution

Source : http://education.randmcnally.com/images/World_Population.png 2014.12.10

For free distribution

59

Secondary World population concentrations

In addition to these population concentrations, there are also many secondary population concentrations with a high density of population in almost allthe countries.

²Eastern Western and North Eastern coastal concentration of North America (linked to the cities of New York, Sanfrancisco and Boston).

²The Eastern Coastal concentration of South America (linked to Rio de Janeiro in Brazil.

²Zone around the Nile Estuary (linked to the city of Cairo in Egypt).

²Concentration of Sierra Leone, Liberia, Ivory Cost and Ghana in Western Africa

² About 80% of the world population lives in the above mentioned densely populated areas They have a population density more than 65 persons per square kilometer.

Sparsely populated regions of the world

Out of the total land area of the world, 65% of the land area has a low population.

²Cold deserts (Antarctic and Arctic region)

²Hot deserts (Sahara in the African continent, and Central Australia).

² Mountainous regions (Himalayas, Andes; Rockies etc.)

²Tropical Rainforest Regions (Amazon, Congo)

In these regions the population density is less than five persons per square kilometer. Physical factors like rugged relief and climate has brought about this condition.

Except for the densely populates areas and the sparsely populated areas, the other areas of the world have an average distribution of people. In these regions the population density is between 5 - 65 persons per square kilometer.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

60

Factors that contribute towards the unequal distribution of population

There are many factors that have contributed for the unequal distribution of population. These factors can be divided into two categories;

1. Physical factors

2. Human factors

Physical factors

The physical factors that affect population distribution are the following;

² Climate

²physical features

²Drainage

Variations in the climate on the earth have positively and negatively affected the population distribution in the world. Plains, river valleys and places with fertile soilwith a tropical or a temperate climate have become areas with a high population. The Nile valley and the Indus valley are examples for such regions.

The land in the Polar Regions where the temperature is low, and the climate is extremely cold, the arid regions where there is a high temperature and a very low rainfall, and regions where there is a high temperature and heavy rainfall like the Amazon and the Congo Basins are areas of low population.

The nature of the terrain is also an important geographic feature determining population distribution. When the terrain consists of a rugged relief, the area is sparsely populated. For instance, in a mountainous region, population density is low. Areas around Himalayas, Andes and Rockies can be shown as examples. In addition to these, distribution of natural resources and natural vegetation are also factors that affect population distribution.

Human as well as physical factors have affected population distribution. Location of different industrial centers, urbanization, trade canters and ports, development of

For free distribution

61

infrastructure, availability of diverse services and establishment of administrative activities are also important human factors that affect population distribution.

The effects of the above factors are minimized with the development in scientific knowledge and technology.

Activities

1. Mark and name the main world population concentration zones and secondary concentration on an outline map of the world.

2. What factors have caused the unequal population distribution in the world? Describe with examples.3. Name a million city each for the high density population conglomerates.

4. Prepare a list including problems related to high population concentration zones.

Assignment

Prepare a graph to show how the world population developed throughout history to date.

Bibliography and Sources

²http://worldpopulationreview.com/continents

²http://singularityhub.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/image2.jpg

²http://www.usfunds.com/media/images/frank-talk-images/2011-frank-talk/jul-dec-2011/WorldPop-7billion-102811.gif

²http://www.sustainablescale.org/images/uploaded/Population

²http://www.prb.org/images12/world-trends.gif

²United Nations, World population prospects, the 1998-Revi.Population Reference Bureau, population data sheet 2011

²http://education.randmcnally.com/images/edpub/World_Population.png

²http://www. worldmeters info/world. population/population-by-countryl

²http://geography.about.com/od/obtain population data /a/ world population.htm

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

62

Glossary

²Gender - mqñ;sßnj - £õ¼Ú

²Literacy - idlaIr;dj - GÊzuÔÄ

²Development process - ixj¾Ok l%shdj,sh - A¤Â¸zva ö\¯ß•øÓ

²Optimum level - m%Yia; uÜgu - Ezu© ©mh®

²Archaeological evidences - mqrdúoHd;aul idlaIs - öuõÀ¼¯À \õßÖPÒ

²Historical data - ft;sydisl o;a; - Áµ»õØÖz uµÄPÒ

²Population explosion - ckixLHd iafMdagkh - Siz öuõøP öÁi¨¦

²Earth’s surface - mDÓú ;,h - ¦Â ÷©Ø£µ¨¦

²Population density - ck>k;ajh - Siz öuõøP Ahºzv

²Population concentration zones - ck ixflakaøK l,dm - SizöuõøP Tmk Á»¯[PÒ

²Secondary concentration - oaú;Shsl ixflakaøK - Cµshõ® {ø»U Tmk

²Sparsely populated regions - ck ySk m%foaY - SøÓÁõÚ SizöuõøP¨

¤µ÷u\[PÒ

²Rugged relief - r¿ úIu;dj - Pµk•µhõÚ uøµz÷uõØÓ®

²Diversity of climate - foaY.=K úúO;ajh - Põ»{ø»¨ £ÀÁøPø©

²Arid regions - Y=Ial m%foaY - Áµsh ¤µ÷u\[PÒ

²Accessibility - iq.u;dj - \©©õÚ uøµ¯ø©¨¦

²Location of industry - l¾udka; ia:dk.;ùu - øPzöuõÈÀ Aø©Âh®

²Urbanization - kd.ÍlrKh - |PµõUP®

²Infrastructure facilities - há;, myiqlï - Em Pmk©õÚ Á\vPÒ

For free distribution

63

Data regarding the population of Sri Lanka is collected by the Department of Census and Statistics after conducting a survey on population and housing. The first formal census was conducted in 1871 and generally, a census is carried out once in every ten years.

Although Sri Lanka is a developing country, when certain qualitative features like the Infant Mortality Rate, Maternal Mortality Rate, Life Expectancy and Literacy are considered, it shows features of a developed country. Therefore, when compared to the other developing countries, Sri Lanka remains at a special position. The progress in Education and Health sectors has greatly contributed to this situation.

The Population of Sri Lanka

4

The main objective of this lesson is to study about the population, the size of the population, the growth of population, the distribution of the population, the composition of population and the population structure.

Size of the Population

In 2012 the population of Sri Lanka was around 20.2 million. According to the census data, the density of Sri Lankan population is 323 persons per square kilometer. When compared to other countries in the South Asian zone, Sri Lanka holds the 5th position in the size of population. However, a similar comparison shows that Sri Lanka has the lowest rate of population growth (observe table 4.1).

Table 4.1 - The Population, Population density and the Average Annual Growth of the population in South Asian countries (2013).countryPopulation(millions)Population density per km2The general annual growth rateIndia1.2523811.3Pakistan 182 2291.8Bangladesh 15610871.1Nepal 27 1891.2Sri Lanka 21 3240.8Bhutan 0.75 161.9Maldives0.3411581.8Source ( un Population chart, 2013, www.unpoulation.org

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

64

Population Growth

Population growth is the growth of population within a specific unit of land. The census reports of Sri Lanka from 1871 show that there is a continuous growth in population. The population of Sri Lanka which was 2.4 million according to the first census in 1871 has risen up to 20.2

Source – Population and housing census report 2012, based on department of population and statistics.

Graph 4.1 - Population growth according to census years

Source - Population and housing data, Department of population and statistics 2012

Table 4.2 population of Sri Lanka and the Average Annual Growth rate (1871 – 2012)

Census yearsPopulationThe average annual year18711881189119011911192119311946195319631971198120012012

2,400,3802,759,7383,007,7393,565,9544,106,3504,498,6055,306,8716,657,3398,097,89510,582,06412,689,89514,846,75018,797,25720,277,597

1.40.91.71.40.91.71.52.82.62.21.71.20.7

Table 4.1 and graph 4.2 show that the rate of population growth has changed although the population has grown continuously since the first census. During the period from 1871 AD to 1946 AD, the population has grown at a slow pace, but the growth rate has accelerated after 1946. The highest rate of growth that is 2.8 was reported during the years 1946 – 53. The rate has gradually decreased to 0.7 in 2012. Decline in the natural growth and emigration cause the decline in population growth.

million in 2012. The continuous growth of population in Sri Lanka is depicted in graph 4.1. Table 4.2 shows the average annual growth rate, and the population growth during the inter-census period from 1871-2012.

For free distribution

65

There are provincial differences related to population growth in Sri Lanka. The population growth in Sri Lanka is relatively higher in the districts of the Dry Zone than in the Wet Zone districts. Though the average growth rate of population in Sri Lanka is 0.7% the birth rate in Anuradhapura District is 1.33,in Hambanthota it is 1.17% and in the Monaragala District it is 1.15%.In the Wet Zone we can observe a lower rate of population growth. In Colombo it is 0.35%, in Nuwara Eliya it is 0.05% and in Badulla it is 0.39%. However, a higher population growth can be seen in Kaluthara and Gampaha districts in the Wet Zone, recording a rate of 1.23% and 1.02% respectively. According to the census reports, proximity to the Colombo district and migrations have affected the higher rates of population in these two districts.(http://www.statistics.gov.lk/17/06/2015)

Graph 4.2 - The Ratio Differences In The Annual Population Growth Rate.Source - Population and housing data, Department of population and statistics 2012

Activity

1. prepare a bar-graph to show the size of population in the South Asian countries referring to the data given in table 4.1.

2. What are the temporal trends seen in population growth in Sri Lanka from 1871 to date?

3. Describe the provincial differences in population growth giving examples.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

66

Population Distribution

The population distribution of Sri Lanka shows an unequal nature. When the population distribution in the provinces is considered, more than 1/4of the total population, around 28.8% of the population, is concentrated in the Western Province. A high population distribution is found in the Central Province (12.6%) Southern Province (12.2%) and in North Eastern Province (11.7%) too. The lowest population distribution, 5.2%, is found in the Northern province. (Graph 4.3)

Graph 4.3- Population Distribution in the Provinces

Source – Population and housing census data, Department of Population and Census 2012.

The Colombo District has the highest population with a population of 2,323,826 according to the census conducted in 2012.

Many factors have affected the high population,such as accumulation of commercial and administrative operations, educational activities and services in this district. There is a very large population in the Gampaha District too (2,298,588). Migration to the Biyagama and Katunayake Free Trade Zones and selecting Gampaha as a convenient residential area due to easy access to Colombo are the main reasons for this relatively high population. Besides Colombo and Gampaha Districts, Kurunegala (1,611,407), Kandy (1,368,216), Kalutara (1,214,880), Rathnapura (1,082,299) and Galle (1,059,046 ) are the other districts with a high population. The population in these districts exceeds one million. Mullativu, Mannar, Killinochchi and Vauniya districts in the Northern Province record a very low population.

For free distribution

67

The Mulativu District has the lowest population which is 92,228.

The distribution of population can be clearly identified by the population density.

Map 4.1 - Population dencity in Sri Lanka

Source - http://i.imgur.com/lfSi1.jpg 2015.07.20

According to the census the average density of population is 323, but in certain districts there is high density of population while in certain other districts the population density is extremely low. Map 4.1 shows the population density of Sri Lanka in 2012.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

68

Activities

1. Observe Map 4.1 and write down three districts which have the highest population and three districts which have the lowest population.

2. (i) On an outline map of Sri Lanka, shade the districts which contains the highest population and the lowest population.

(ii) Explain clearly the reasons for the uneven distribution of population.

3. Mention three measures that could be taken to minimize the inequalities in the distribution of population in Sri Lanka.

Graph 4.4 - Distribution of Population in Rural , Urban and Plantation areas

Source – Population and housing data population and statistics department 2012

The population distribution in Sri Lanka can also be classified as urban, rural and plantation population .According to the graph 4.4,the rural population is 77.3%, the urban population is 18.3% and the plantation population is 4.4%

Even though different ethnic and religious communities represent the whole population, they all are Sri Lankans.

Population Composition

Sri Lanka is a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country. The population in Sri Lanka is divided into five categories; Sinhala, Sri Lankan Tamils, Indian Tamils, Moors and others. Malays, Burghers and Europeans represent others. The main religious communities are the Buddhist, Hindu, Islam and Christian communities. Graphs 4.5 and 4.6 depict the ethnic and religious composition in the population.

For free distribution

69

Graph 4.5. Ethnic CompositionGraph 4.6 Religious Composition in the population 2012

Population Structure

The population structure of a place shows how the population is divided up between males and females of different age groups. According to the 2012 census report age and gender structures are shown below.

Source – Socio Economic data of Sri Lanka 2013

Special features of the population in Sri Lanka

A special feature in the Sri Lankan population is the gradual decrease of young people and the gradual increase of the elderly people. When the popula-tion of people over 59 years of age in a country or region rises due to increased life expectancy and declining birth rate it is called the population aging. This results the gradual decline of the labour force. Sri Lanka, along with many other countries in the world is facing the challenge of population aging. In the same manner the percentage of women in the population has also increased. By studying the age structure according to gender, we can find information regarding the labour force, the number of women who are capable to have children and the number of dependents.

Population according to age

< 15 yrs - 25.8%

Between 15 -59 - 62.0%

> 60 yrs - 12.2%

Population according to gender

Male - 48.5%

Female - 51.5%

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

70

Activities

1. According to the data of 2012 census , what special features of the Sri Lankan population can be identified?

2. “Like many other countries in the world, Sri Lanka is also facing the population aging problem”.

Explain what is meant by the term ‘aging population’ and what are the problems a country would face relating to that?

3. Show by means of graphs the ethnic and religious composition of the population of Sri Lanka.

Bibliography and Sources ²Department of population and statistics - Population and Housing Sensus Report - 2012

²Socio Economic Data of Sri Lanka (2013). The central Bank of Sri Lanka.

²un population chart, 2013, www.unpopulation org

²http://i. imgur.com / ifsil. jpg2015/06/22

²http : //www statistics. gov. lk/Pop/ Housal/ CPH2011/Pages.sm/CPH% 20 2011-R1.Pdf

Glossary

²Department of - ck yd ixLHd f,aLk - öuõøP©v¨¦ ¦ÒÎÂ£µz

Census and Statistics fomd¾;fïka;=j vønUPÍ®

²Developing countries - ixj¾Okh fjñka mj;sk - A¤Â¸zv Aøh¢x Á¸®

rgj,a |õkPÒ

²Infant mortality - <ore urK - ]_ ©µn®

²Maternal mortality - ud;D urK - PØ¤ozuõ´ ©µn Ãu®

²Life expectancy - wdhq wfmalaIdj - ¤µ\Á ©µn®

²Population composition - ck ixhq;sh - \ÚzöuõøP Tmk

²Population structure - ckixLHd jHqyh - \ÚzöuõøPU Pmhø©¨¦

For free distribution

71

²Census reports - ix.Kk jd¾;d - öuõøP ©v¨¦ AÔUøP

²Annual growth rate - jd¾Isl j¾Ok wkqmd;slh - Á¸hõ¢u ÁÍºa] Ãu®

²Growth rate - j¾Ok YS>%;dj - ÁÍºa] Ãu®

²Birth rate - Wm;a wkqmd;slh - ¤Ó¨¦ ÂQu®

²Death rate - urK wkqmd;slh - CÓ¨¦ ÂQu®

²Natural growth - iajdNdúl j¾Okh - C¯ØøP AvP›¨¦

²Labour force - Y%u n,ldh - FÈ¯¨ £øh

²Dependents - hefmkakka - u[Q°¸¨÷£õº

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

72

The concept of development has changed over time. Until the middle of the 20th century, the economic development in a country was termed as ‘development’. (Fig. 5.1)

Development is a dynamic concept. It is continuous and unending.

Fig. 5.2 - present Indicators to measure development.

Fig. 5.1 - Indicators used to measure development during the early period.

5

Development

The main objective of this chapter is to study the basic concepts of development and also the development procedures in Sri Lanka.

Fi5 1I ditd tdlt

Later, “development” became a broader concept which encompasses several fields. By the end of the 20th century, development was not only an economic and physical assessment but also included components essential for human development.

For free distribution

73

The meaning of the term “development” becomes clearer when some definitions of development are studied.“Social development should take place along with economic development. social development should take place within sectors encompassing food and nutrition, health, education, housing social security, clothing, leisure and human freedom” (1978, UNESCO Declaration ).“Development is a chain of processes which includes factors related to population, social, cultural and ethical issues”(3rd development decade 1980 – 90 UNO).In the process of development focus was on protecting and conserving the environment, and also on the quality of the environment in the 80’s and in the 90’s more focus was on sustainable development. With regard to sustainable development, the inter-relationship among the economic, social and environmental fields was also incorporated into the concept of development. As the concept of development has evolved over time, different indicators to measure development have also been used.

Activities

1. Prepare a simple definition to make the concept of ‘development’ more meaningful.2. Obtain instructions from teachers and collect other definitions to identify the concept of ‘development’.

3. Indictors to measure Development

Although development has been identified as a concept, different countries adopted different indicators to measure it. Once the wide meaning of development was understood, various institutions,organizations and individuals introduced more qualitative indicators to assess it.

Old indicator Modern indicator ²Gross National Product ²Per capita income ²Gross Nation Development

²Physical Quality of Life Index(P Q L I) ²Human Development Index (H D I) ²Human Poverty Index (H P I) ²Human Suffering Index (H S I)

Indicators to measure Development

It was not possible to express the real status of ‘development’ by the indicators used during the early period. They were adequate only to show the middle and low levels of development. Later the concept developed further, and the Human Development Index (HDI) which was introduced by the United

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

74

Nations Development Programme (1990/1999), was used to measure ‘development’. Through that indicator, it was possible to avoid the weakness and identify the ‘real status of development’. This indicator which includes three basic features of human development is a compact indicator. The main indicators used in measuring Human Development Indicator are, life expectancy at birth, literacy and purchasing power parity tallied with the per capita gross national product.

According to the index which extends 0-1 countries of the world can be identified under four groups.

1. Countries where human development is very high

2. Countries where human development is high

3. Countries where human development is moderate

4. Countries where human development is low

Activity

1. Write two indicators used to measure development in the,

(a) Early period.

(b) Modern period.

2. “Development does not mean only the economic development of a country” Explain this statement with examples.

3. “The best indicator to measure the development of a country is the Human Development Index” Give reasons to justify this statement.

4. Describe briefly how the development of a country can be done without being an obstacle to environment equilibrium.

Sustainable Development

In the past most countries of the world considered progress in the economic field as development. This idea being prevalent even during the 21st century has given rise to several unfavourable consequences.

Sri Lanka, in the year 2012 has obtained development index with a value of 0.715 and had acquired the 92nd place out of 187 countries of the world.(Central Bank Report of Sri Lanka 2012)

Among the SAARC countries, Sri Lanka has the highest level of human development and is also the only SAARC country which is in the high development group (Annual Report 2013. Finance and Plan implementation Ministry)

For free distribution

75

Fig. 5.3 - Development Reactions

Consequences of Development

Resources in the development process

Imbalance in Natural resources

Scarcity of resources

Effects on environment

The necessity for sustainable development program

Increase in global warming

Damages to the

Environmental pollution

Harming bio resources

Climate changes

Natural disasters

Competition to own resources

Exhaustion of resources

Excessive consumption of natural resources

Search for alternative resources

Due to the fast growth of population, increase in needs and needs becoming more complexed new production process has been widened. As industrialization took place without proper control, an environmental imbalance emerged. Hence attention was paid on sustainable development to prevent the imbalance of the environment. The objective of sustainable development is to incorporate the management of the development process with the environmental management. It focuses on future while upgrading the man’s existence and life style.

Ozone layer

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

76

Activityivity

² New employment opportunities arise

² Internal migration patterns change

² Time is saved and physical distance become less

² Movement of passengers and goods is accelerated

² New products reach the market quickly

² Widening of the trade market

² New areas of the country will be open to development

² A change occurs in the supply route grid of existing goods and services (Automobile, Aviation, Harbour)

By improving infra- structure facilities

Activity

Explain with examples that it is essential to have a sustainable development process for the survival of a country.

Assignment

1. With the aid of the information of mass media, Prepare a list of problems which have emerged when countries of the world undergo the development process.2. Present suggestions to solve those problems.

Recent development activities in Sri Lanka

A self - sufficient economy was prevalent in Sri Lanka during the hydraulic civilization. However, when Sri Lanka became a colony of western nations, it turned out to be an import - export economy. After Sri Lanka gained independence, farming settlements, river – valley developments, multi- purpose development schemes, Large scale industries free trade zones, export villages, industrial settlements and activities of similar nature took place along diverse fields.

The main focus of the present development process is on the improvement of infrastructure facilities. Improvement of infrastructure facilities which is considered as a necessity for the development of a country, would also help in the human resource development.

For free distribution

77

Fig: 5.5 - Highway bypass

Fig. 5.4 - Recent development projects in Sri Lanka

Railway and highway development

² Construction of many new roads (Colombo – Matara, Colombo -Katunayaka Colombo outer circular Road)

² Proposed Express ways ((Colombo – Jaffna, Colombo – Kandy, Matara- Hambantota)

² Road construction project in the North; under this project construction has been completed on the Kandy Jaffna road, ParanthanPooneryn, Mankulam –Wellamkulam, BatticaloaTrincomalee and many other roads.

²As buses with modern facilities run on these roads, time spent on travelling and physical distance have been minimized.

²Widening and carpeting of existing roads.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

78

Fig. 5.6 - Colombo Harbour (with the new jetty)

²Minimizing traffic congestion by constructing flyovers.(Nugegoda, Ragama, Veyangoda). ²constructing underground tunnels (Ramboda) and pedestrian crossings(Kandy, Borella). ²Removal of unauthorized constructions on pavements and construction of pavements(Colombo Fort ,Pettah and Kandy). ²Improving the Southern railway. ²Widening the Kelani valley road. ²Reconstructing the Northern Railway. ²Commencing work on the proposed- Matara – Kataragama railway up to Dikwella. ²Reconstructing Colombo – Jaffna Railway.

Development of Ports and Airports ²Developing the Bandaranayake International Airport in Katunayake with modern facilities. ²Constructing a new international airport at Mattala. ²Developing domestic airports like Rathmalana, Palaly and Anuradhapura.

Activities

1. Mark the existing and proposed expressways on an outline map of Sri Lanka.

2. What are the advantages of developing roads and railways in a country?

²Improving infrastructure facilities such as railways, availability of motor vehicles around airports. ²Making Katunayaka and Mattala airports as centers providing service for the international air services during emergencies. ²Improving Colombo Sothern port, Oluvil port and widening their service conditions.

For free distribution

79

²The construction of Magampura Port in Hambantota with modern facilities. Arrangement for re-export, providing of fuel and water for ships storage for fuel, vehical yards and container terminals are also planned to be built in the surroundings.

Fig. 5.7 - A container ship

² Improve Dry Docks. ² Improve facilities in old ports located in the North, East and Galle. If the above plans are implemented, Sri Lanka would be a destination for large ships and for tourist cruise ships with very modern facilities.

Development of Human Resources

In developing a country, man is considered the most important resource. He has been able to innovate and produce goods using all the resources of the physical environment by using his intelligence and skills. In other words, man creates the cultural environment based on the physical environment. Hence it becomes essential to launch programme to improve man’s physical and mental skills as well as his spiritual values when developing human resources.

Since ancient times, Sri Lanka has been a country favorable to man. From the time Sri Lanka obtained independence, education, health services and security was provided free. Certain services are provided with concessions to a selected crowd. Sri Lanka is also considered a welfare state because all governments that came into power provided common amenities free of charge.

Housing projects, community health programmes, Devineguma, Samudhi and Jana Saviya programmes were launched from time to time for human development. Maga Neguma project to develop roads at rural level and self employment projects were started to bring about development in the community. Under these projects opportunities to bring about leisure and entertainment were also provided.

²It is planned to build the Port city, with Housing complexes, Shopping Complexes, Hotel complexes, Service centers, and places with facilities for recreational activities.

² Identifying the location of Sri Lanka at the centre of the maritime silk route and making it the center of re-export in the container transport.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

80

Similar to improvements in various fields in the country there are innumerable projects which are also implemented at rural, urban and provincial levels.

It is essential to develop education of the citizens in order to improve their ability to develop the country. With the aim of realizing

Fig. 5.9 - Steps taken to develop Education in Sri Lanka

² Giving scholarships to students

² Poly- Technical Colleges.

² Increasing the number of universities and increasing the student intake

² Widening of higher education

² Introducing technological subjects to G.C.E. (Advanced Level)

² Science colleges

² Computer training institutions

² Navodaya schools

² Providing modern laboratory facilities

² Setting up vocational training institutes for school dropouts

² Thousand schools programme

² Technical schools

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

²

Educational development progress

Fig. 5.8 - Diyawanna parkthis objective, special attention paid to provide education for all, improve quality of education and organize educational opportunities to suit the changing labour market. Many steps have been taken with these purposes in view.

In the Development Process of a country, it is essential to produce a healthy community. For this purpose health facilities of a country has to be developed. The services rendered by the Health Sector as a welfare service in Sri Lanka has to be appreciated.

For free distribution

81

Activities

1. Write down five procedures that have been implemented to develop human resources in Sri Lanka. 2. Explain how such procedures contribute towards the development of the country with examples.

These services are programmes focused on human development in Sri Lanka within the past decade. People with healthy bodies and healthy minds can successfully achieve benefits of education and it is easy to motivate them towards the development process. Similarly, they can change, bear the burden of change and also succeed in enjoying its benefits. It is expected to build a social environment through such a group of citizens by developing health and education sectors.

Regional Development

To facilitate provincial development administrative divisions are set up in Sri Lanka, as villages, Gramaseveka Divisions, Divisional secretariat Divisions, Districts and Provinces. Similarly, from the National Level to the Provincial level there is a chain of activities in the development process.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

82

Village

• Empowering the low income groups in the rural sector by means of Janasaviya, Divineguma and Samurdhi projects. • Taking steps to remove rural unemployment by the 200 garment Factory project. • Reconstruction of rural roads by using asphalt carpeting and also paving them with concrete and stone. • Improvements in common amenities under “One task for one village”programme. • Empowering the economic Strength of rural unemployed under the Divineguma project. • Improving rural industries and setting up rural hydro-power projects to uplift the lives of people in remote, isolated villages. • Implementing community based water projects for cultivation of crops and to fulfill water requirements. • Implementing Gami Diriya project Centered on places of worship, Sports associations and funeral welfare societies. • Appointing service personnel who would work with rural family units and set up programmes to empower such families.

Town

• Broadening roads in urban areas by the road Development Authority. • Removal of unauthorized constructions and clearing pavements for the pedestrians. • Landscaping and developing cities (Colombo, Sri Jayawardenepura Kotte, Gall and Kandy). • Widening opportunities for leisure and entertainment in urban surrounding. • Removal of slums, accelerating high rise building projects, new housing complexes and reconstructing urban housing complexes by National housing Development authority. • Building new shopping complexes. • Removal of swamps in urban areas and constructing Sports grounds, swimming pools, and leisure parks on such lands. • Improving facilities close to public utility centers. • Constructing urban car parks. • Changes made in Provincial Administration structure; Provincial Councils Pradeshiya Sabha Municipal councils Urban councils. • Implement solid waste management programmes.

Table 5.1 - Various development projects in Sri Lanka.

The main objective of Regional Development is to act towards human welfare, minimizing discriminations, by utilizing the resources and the physical environment centered in different areas.

Since gaining independence, for many decades, various development projects have been implemented in order to minimize the gap between the village and town. (table 5.1)

For free distribution

83

Activities

1. Name three benefits that can be achieved by improving facilities in rural areas.

2. “Development in village / town helps development in the country” Explain this statement with examples.

Knowledge based Development and Information and Communication Technology

Information and communication technology is a service which is used to collect, store, analyze and exchange data in various sectors. Through this the country and the human society has gained many facilities.

²Improvement in relationships within and outside the country.

²Opening up more avenues in education.

²Opening up direct and indirect employment opportunities and assisting both the prospective service providers and the services receivers.

²widens the knowledge of ordinary people and also broadens opportunities to fulfill employment needs.

²Could contribute quickly in times of disaster (like during cyclones, floods, land slides and tsunamis).

²With electronic financial system transactions become quick and safe.

It is important that a person must be aware of how he could obtain the service facilities of Information and communication technology and also about the equipment and tools to be selected for such activities. It is essential for a person to have a basic education and to know many steps as to how technological tools can be manipulated, collect data, store and analyze them and to communicate. In Sri Lanka new avenues have been opened up for diverse professions and for those engaged in education through Information and Communication Technology.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

84

I.C.T units and internet facilities for school systems

Agency Institutions for Sri Lanka I.C.T

NenaSala centers and E Sri Lanka programs to supply service facilities.Facilities provided by the Telecommunication Regulatory Commission

G.C.E (Advanced Level) techonology stream implemented since 2013

Higher education opportunities provided by Universities and Higher education institutions

Competitive Private Higher Education Institutions

Sources to acquire I C T Knowledge

Activities

1. Prepare a paper including recent trends in the development activities in Sri Lanka. 2. Describe how upgrading infrastructure in a country affects development .3. Prepare a list to show the benefits that a country can gain by improving I.C. T.4. Write down three advantages and three disadvantages of the internet.

Assignments

Prepare a field work book including information about a programme implemented to improve facilities in the urban or rural areas in the region where you live.

For free distribution

85

Bibliography and Sources

Ministry of Finace and Planning /Annual Report 2013

Glossary

²Static concept - .;sl ixl,amh - {ø»¯õÚ GsnU P¸

²Real national product - uQ¾; o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;h - ö©õzuz ÷u]¯ EØ£zv

²Gross national per-capita product - m%;sYS¾I o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;h - ö©õzuz ÷u]¯ uÛ|£º

EØ£zv

²Growth rate of G.N.P. - o< cd;sl ksIamdÈ;fha j¾Ok fõ.h - G.N.P. Cß ÁÍºa] Ãu®

²Physical Quality of Life Index - fN!;sl Ôjk ;;a;aj o¾Ylh - ö£ÍvP ÁõÌUøP¨

£s¦a _möhs

²Human Development Index - udkqI ixj¾Ok o¾Ylh - ©Ûu A¤Â¸zva

_möhs

²Human Poverty Index - udkqI oßø;d o¾Ylh - ©Ûu ÁÖø©a _möhs

²Human suffering Index - udkqI mSvl o¾Ylh - ©õÛh FPa _möhs

²Composite Index - ix.Dys; o¾Ylh - Tmka _möhs

²Life expectancy - wdhq wfmalaIdj - B²Ò Gvº£õº¨¦

²Literacy - idlaIr;dj - GÊzuÔÄ

²Purchasing power parity - l%h Yla;sh - öPõÒÍÍÄ \Uv

²Sustainable development - ;srir ixj¾Okh - {ø»zv¸US® A¤Â¸zv

²Industrialization - ld¾ólrKh - øPzöuõÈÀ ©¯©õuÀ

²Environmental disequilibrium - mdßißl úix;=,kh - `ÇÀ \©{ø»°ßø©

²Environmental equilibrium - mdßißl iu;=,s;;dj - `ÇÀ \©{ø»

²Hydraulic civilization - c,dY%s; YsIagdpdrh - }ºÁÍ |õP›P®

²Self-sufficient economy - iajhxfmdaIs; wd¾Ólh - ußÛøÓÄ¨

ö£õ¸Íõuõµ®

²Agricultural Colonies - f.dú ckmo - ÂÁ\õ¯U Põ»ÛPÒ

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

86

²Export villages - wmkhk .ïudk - HØÖ©vU Qµõ©[PÒ

²River Valley - .x.d ksïk ixj¾Ok jHdmD;sh - BØÖ¨ £ÒÍzuõUS

Development Project A¤Â¸zva ö\¯ØÔmh®

²Multi- Purpose - nyqld¾h ixj¾Ok - £À÷|õUS A¤Â¸zva

Development Projects fhdackd l%u ö\¯ØÔmh®

²Free – trade zones - ksoyia fjf<| l,dm - _u¢vµ ÁºzuP Á»¯®

²Industrial colony - ld¾ñl ckmo - øPzöuõÈÀ Põ»Û

²Movement of goods - NdKav ixp,kh - £sh[PÎß Aø\Ä

²Internal migrations - wNHka;r ixl%uK - EÒ|õmk Ch¨ ö£¯ºÄ

²Underground tunnels - N+.; Wux ud¾. - _¸[P¨ £õøuPÒ

²Pedestrian crossings - mÈl udre - £õu\õ›PÒ PhøÁ

²Unauthorized constructions - wkjir bÈlsÍï - \mhÂ÷µõuU Pmhø©¨¦PÒ

²Re-exports - m%;swmkhk - «Ò HØÖ©v

²Vehicle parks - jdyk wx.k - ÁõPÚ {Özxªh®

²Container transport - nyd¨ï m%jdyk - öPõÒP»ß ÷£õUSÁµzx

²Re-export centre - m%;swmkhk uOHia:dkh - PÍg]¯ {ø»¯®

²Curative programmes - frda. ksjdrK jevigyka - ÷|õ´ £›Põµ {PÌa]z vmh®

²Road Development Authority - ud¾. ixj¾Ok wêldßh - Ãv A¤Â¸zv AvPõµ \ø£

For free distribution

87

Natural Hazard

A natural hazard is an event in the environment that occurs naturally that could cause harm to humans, economic assets or environment.

Natural Disaster

If the community and their physical resources and the human activities are damaged by effects of a certain hazard, such incidents are called natural disasters. In other words, a natural disaster occurs when natural hazards are activated.War, terrorism collapsing of buildings, road traffic accidents that affect the community are known as disasters but they are not considered as natural disasters.

Fig. 6.2 - Natural disaster

The natural environment in the world is subjected to large or small scale natural changes periodically. These changes occur without much notice at times. Certain changes are quite fascinating. Sometimes they occur unexpectedly and could be quite destructive. In whichever way they occur, the natural environment has been subjected to changes since the beginning of the earth. These changes may continue to occur in future too. Some of these changes occur without human influence and there are some instances where these changes are intensified as result of human activities. In whatever the way they occur, the possibility to cause damage to environment is identified as a natural hazard.

6

The objective of this chapter is to discuss the areas where natural hazards occur in the world and the problems they cause.

Fig. 6.1 - H azard

Natural hazards in the world

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

88

The hazards can be categorized on the basis of their origin on earth.

Fig. 6.3 - A few natural disasters

For free distribution

89

Causes for Earthquakes

The sudden release of the stored energy in the Earth's crust, when it exceeds the capacity, it causes Earthquakes. The earth’s crust is made up of many tectonic plates which are connected to each other. There are seven main plates and a number of minor plates (Map 6.1). These tectonic plates drift towards different directions and earthquakes are caused as they collide with each other causing powerful movements at the margins. Earthquakes also occur due to faults that are created on the earth’s surface or during volcanic activity.

Activities

1. Identify what a hazard is.

2. Explain the difference between a natural hazard and a disaster with examples.

3. Classify the following natural disasters that occur due to natural processes and that are intensified due to human activities.

(floods, tsunamis, cyclones, bushfires, avalanches, earthquakes, droughts and landslides).

Earthquakes

Fig. 6.4 – An incident of an earthquake

Tremors occur on the surface of the Earth as a result of the shock waves generated by the movement of rock masses within the crust of the Earth particularly near boundaries of tectonic plates. When they occur suddenly and bring about a vast destruction, they are called earthquakes.

In addition to this categorization, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, cyclones and lightning can be identified as natural hazards that occur without any human influence while landslides, droughts, floods, bushfires and avalanches can be identified as natural hazards that are intensified by the human activities.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

90

Map 6.1 - How tectonic plates in the world are formed

For free distribution

91

Magnitude of earthquakes

A seismometer is used to measure the intensity or the magnitude of the earthquakes. The seismic information received through that is recorded in the seismograph. The values indicated can be included in a scale. This method was introduced by Charles F Richter in 1935. Hence, it is called the Richter scale.

Table 6.1 indicates the magnitude of earthquakes and the results according to the values on the Richter scale.

Value of the Richter scaleResult2.0 - 3.5

3.5 - 5.5

5.5 - 7.3

7.4 - 8.0

8.0 <

People do not feel it but it is recorded on the scale.

Everybody feels it.

Buildings may collapse.

Serious destruction can be seen.

Completely destructive.

Major earthquake zones of the world

When observing map 6.2 the plate boundary zones can be identified as the areas where earthquakes occur constantly. The map 6.2 shows four major zones where earthquakes take place in the world.

Map 6.2 - Earthquake zones

A - The area that spreads around the Pacific Ocean. (Pacific Ring of Fire)

B - Mediterranean-Himalaya mountain zone.

C - Mid- Atlantic oceanic ridge.

D - The African Rift Valley Zone.

Table 6.1 - Magnitude of earthquakes and their impacts

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

92

Tsunami

Impact of earthquakes

²Cracks and faults appear on the crust.

² Landslides and sinking of lands take place in mountainous regions.

²When earthquakes occur in the ocean bed they cause Tsunamis and destroy the coastal areas the nearby countries.

²Damage to human life and property, destruction of the natural drainage system and infra-structure facilities.

Phenomena that create Tsunami waves

²Massive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that occur in the ocean bed.

²Landslides that occur in the ocean bed.

²Fall of meteorites into the sea.

²Falling of large ice sheets from the glaciers into the sea.

² Powerful explosions made by man on the surface of the oceans.

Among them, the major factor that causes Tsunami waves is the earthquakes that occur in the ocean beds. As a result of sudden and powerful tremors occurring on plate margins, the ocean water is disturbed and creates large tidal waves on the surface of the ocean. When these waves approach land areas their height is increased gradually and they convert into Tsunami wave near the coast. These Tsunami waves cause severe destruction to the coastal areas. Fig. 6.5 shows how Tsunami waves are formed.

The high and lengthy strong ocean waves caused as a result of the different tremors origin at the ocean bed, that approach the coastal areas are called Tsunamis.

Activities

1. What is known as an earthquake?

2. Name the major earthquake zones located in the world and shade these areas on a world map.

For free distribution

93

Areas affected by Tsunamis.

Tsunami is often seen in the areas where earthquakes are caused.

²The coastal areas around the Pacific Ocean. ²East Indian coast line and the Indian Ocean. ²Coastal areas close to the Caribbean islands.

The impact of the Tsunami disaster ²Damage to human life. ²Destruction of the physical and human landscape of coastal areas. ²Obstruction to fisheries activities. ²Spread of epidemics. ²Displacement of the community and the psychological effect on the survivors.Figures 6.6 and 6.7 show how the Banda Aache area in Sumatra islands has been destroyed due to tsunami in 2004.

Fig. 6.6 - Banda Aache area in Sumatra Before tsunami

Fig. 6.5 - How a Tsunami wave is formed

Fig. 6.7 - Banda Aache in Sumatra After tsunami

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

94

Activities

1. What is a Tsunami?

2. Write down three major causes of Tsunami.

3. Name the areas that face Tsunami disasters in the world and mark them on a world map.

4. Explain the damage caused by a Tsunami citing examples.

The effect of the various substances emitted into the atmosphere during a volcanic eruption cannot be ignored.. In addition to that it could result short term changes in weather conditions and could obstruct air travel too as the ash plumes spread in the atmosphere.

Distribution of volcanoesFig. 6.6 - A volcano Eruption

Volcanoes

When the magma in the Earth's interior escapes through the cracks and the weak areas in the tectonic plate margins, it is called a volcanic eruption. After the eruption, the magma that flows on the surface of the earth is called lava.

At the beginning, smoke, ashes, different gases and pieces of lava are ejected to the atmosphere and at the same time lava flows through the crater (vent) of the volcano. The lava that erupted from the crater of the volcano flows around the volcano and deposits as cool solid layers. After that, the volcano becomes dormant. Although it is a dormant volcano it may become re-active causing a hazardous situation.

When a volcano erupts a huge damage could be caused to human life, property, as well as to infra- structure facilities.

Volcanoes are mostly found on tectonic plate boundaries. they are also found on plate subduction areas and in zones located out of plate boundary areas. 70% of active volcanoes are located in the Pacific plate margins around the Pacific Ocean. This is famous as the Pacific Ring of Fire.

For free distribution

95

Impact caused by volcanoes

The information in the following table depict that the volcanoes cause various types of destruction.

VolcanoYear eruptedDestruction caused

1. Vesuvius (Italy)

2. Vesuvius (Italy)

3. Krakatoa (Indonesia)

4. Pelee (Martini Islands)5. Pinatubo

79 AD

1631 AD

1883 AD

1902 AD

1991 AD

The whole city of Pompeii was destroyed and 16000 human lives were lost.

Eruption prevailed for two days. People of 15 cities of the surrounding area were affected by the disaster.

Presence of a dark sky for a number of days due to the emission of ashes and smoke with a large eruption. The tremors of the eruption surroundings caused a Tsunami and about 36000 people were killed.

Killed 30000 people.

Environmental pollution due the emission of ashes. Occurrence of heavy rain. Killed 5000 people.

Map 6.3 - Distribution of volcanoes

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

96

Drought

The main reason for drought is, unexpected delay in receiving rain for a number of days.

The British weather scientists define drought as a continuous time period of 15 days without rain. It is the duration of 30 days in Canada. In Australia the number of days is greater than this. Accordingly, various countries in the world define drought in different ways. However, it is apparent that the main reason for drought is the delay in receiving rain.

People have to face the hazard of drought when the water supply is not sufficient due to the changes in pattern of rainfall or due to decrease of the amount of rainfall. This hazard can be minimized to a certain level if water is provided.

The areas mostly affected by droughts in the world

²Central African Sahel zone. ²Midwest zone in North America. ²Central Australia. ²The areas of Hyderabad, Gujarat and Maharashtra in India.

²North western part of China.

Fig. 6.9 - An area affected by drought

6. Eyjafjallajokull ( Iceland)2010ADBrought air travel in the European countries to a standstill for six days due to the spread of ash plumes in a large area of the atmosphere.

Activities

1. i. Find and name the countries where the following volcanoes are occurred.

St.Helena, Parakuteen, Galapagose, Kilimanjaro, Hekla,Visuvius, Fujiyama, Pinatubo, Mayan, Krakatoa, Ruvapehu.

ii. Mark those volcanoes on an outline map of the world.

2. Explain the damage that is caused to the environment due to eruption of volcanoes giving examples.

For free distribution

97

Cyclones

Impact of droughts

²Presence of a severe water scarcity. ²Destruction of farm lands. ²Infertility of soil. ²Destruction in the bio diversity. ²Damage to vegetation cover ²Obstruction to hydro power generation. ²Humans and animals suffer from starvation and diseases

²Destruction of natural beauty.

Activities

1. Define " drought".

2. Name the major areas which are affected by droughts and mark them in an outline map of the world.

3. State the damages that are caused by droughts and present your ideas to minimize the impacts droughts.

The hard blowing wind spinning fast in a swirl originating with an intense centre of low pressure on the surface of the tropical oceans is called a whirlwind or cyclone.

A whirlwind is the origin of cyclones. The strong winds that gush into the land from the ocean cause severe damage and eventually die out.

Fig. 6.11- A cyclone

The sea waves become stormy waves as a result of blowing the cyclone at a high speed towards the land from the ocean. The coastal landscape would be affected by this and incur heavy losses in the surrounding areas. A disaster condition may prevail due to heavy rain and strong winds.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

98

Map 6.4 - Areas where cyclones occur.

Map 6.4 - The effect of cyclones

Areas affected by cyclones

The land areas located around the oceans where cyclones may occur can be identified as areas affected by this hazard. The tropical areas which have a specific weather condition such as Indonesia, Southern coastal areas of the United States of America and the surrounding areas of the Bay of Bengal can be cited as examples. Various names are used for

these whirl winds according to the surrounding areas of each coast.

Hurricane - in the North Atlantic Ocean.

Willy-Willy - in the Indian Ocean close to the Southeast coast in Australia.

Typhoon - in the Pacific Ocean beyond the coast of East Asia.

Cyclone - in the Indian Ocean surrounding the Bay of Bengal.

Baguio - in the Pacific Ocean close to the Philippine islands.

Map 6.4 - Indicates the areas where cyclones occur in the world.

For free distribution

99

Impacts of cyclones

²Damage to land areas due to the gush of strong winds with heavy rain. ²Damages to the coastal areas due to the stormy waves and high tides. ²Damages to human life and property. ²Pollution of water sources with the flow of the ocean water due to the rising waves. ²Causing damages to infra-structure facilities such as communication systems and electricity lines. ²Obstructions to fisheries activities. ²Spread of epidemics.

Bush Fires

Activities

1. Name the areas affected by cyclones in the world and mark them on an out-line map of the world.2. ‘Cyclones are a destructive hazard’. Explain this with examples.

The climatic conditions such as drought and aridity increase the possibility of the occurrence of bushfires. Similarly, the vegetation in the areas where fire occurs is easily prone to fire. Various types of grass, dry scrub lands and trees can be cited as examples.

Fig.6.12 - A bush fire

Occurrence of fire and its rapid expansion in forests, scrub lands and grasslands naturally or through human activities is called wild fire.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

100

Countries where constant bushfire occur in the world

Australia China

Canada Indonesia

United States of America Central African countries

France

Impacts of bush fires

²Damages caused to human life, property and houses. ²Destruction of wild life. ²Causing damages to vegetation cover. ²Pollution of the atmosphere. ²Impacts on water sources and soil.

Activities

1. Explain how natural as well as human activities cause bush fires.

2. Name five countries where bush fires occur frequently and mark them on an outline map of the world.

3. Explain the damage that is caused to the environment due to bush fires.

Reasons for the occurrence bush fires.

Wild fires occur owing to physical effects as well as due to human activities.

For free distribution

101

Assignment

1. Using the information in the media, mark the places on an outline map of the world where high intensity earthquakes occurred recently and explain briefly their effects.

2. Prepare an article to the school wall paper about the occurrence of tsunami waves due to the earthquakes that occur on oceanic plate margins.

3. Name a few strong cyclones that occurred in the world recently and write the country and the year they happened. For example. Cyclone Katarina which happened in the state of Mississippi in the USA.

4. Prepare a hand out includes the proposals to the community to minimize the disaster caused by bushfire.

Bibliography and Sources

• wdpd¾h A. H. Okmd," zzmßir wOHhkhZZ ^2012&" iriú m%ldYlfhda • wdpd¾h A. H. Okmd," zziajNdúl úm;aZZ ^2008&" iriú m%ldYlfhda• .=re WmfoaYl w;afmd;" zzwdmod l<ukdlrKhZZ cd;sl wOHdmk wdh;kh"

uyr.u' • .=re ud¾f.damfoaY ix.%yh" N+f.da, úoHdj" 13 fY%aKsh" ^2007& cd;sl wOHdmk

wdh;kh" uyr.u'• cd;sl f.dvke.s,s m¾fhaIK ixúOdkh (NBRO) ud¾f.damfoaYlh" ^2009&• uydpd¾h Wmd,s ùrlafldä" fN!;sl N+f.da, úoHdj II, ^2009&" l¾;D m%ldYkhls'• Sri Lanka Urban Multi- hazard Disaster Mitigation Project (SLUM - DMP)

Guidelines.• Cyclones and high winds, flood prone areas, Landslide Prone Areas, Lighting

Striles, Tsunami, (2003)• www. Chpb.gov.lk

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

102

Glossary

²Natural hazard - iajdNdúl Wmøjh - C¯ØøP ChºPÒ

²Natural disaster - iajdNdúl wdmodj - C¯ØøP¨ ÷£µÚºzu®

²Earthquakes - N+ñlïmd - ¦Â|kUP[PÒ

²Tsunami - iqkdñ - _Úõª

²Volcanoes - .sksl÷ - G›©ø»PÒ

²Cyclones - iq<s iq<x - `ÓõÁÎPÒ

²Lightning - wl=Kq ier - ªßÚÀ uõUP®

²Drought - kshÕ - Áµm]

²Bush fire - <eõ.sks - Põmkz w

²Earth’s crust - mDÓú mDIaGh - ¦Â÷¯õk

²Strata of rocks - mdIdK ia;r - £õøÓ¨£øh

²Tectonic movements - N+ p,k - uPmhø\Ä

²Retaining capacity - /|jqï Odß;dj - Gg]°¸US® C¯»ÍÄ

²Tectonic plates - N+ ;eá - ¦ÂUPÁ\zuPkPÒ

²Volcanism - huy,a l%shdj,sh - G›©ø»¯õUP®

²Fault - úfNao - SøÓ/ ¤ÍÄ

²Seismometer - N+ lïmk udkh - ¦Â|kUP Aø»£v P¸Â

²Seismograph - N+ lïmd m%ia;drh - ¦Â|kUP Aø»£v Áøµ¦

²Tectonic plate boundaries - ;eá udhsï l,dm - ¦Â÷¯õmk uPmk GÀø»PÒ

²Meteorites - W,aldmd; - ÂsPØPÒ/ BPõ¯UPØPÒ

²Ocean waves - id.r ;rx. - \•zvµ Aø»PÒ

²Eruption - úodrKh ùu - PUSuÀ

²Crater / vent - huy,a uqLh - G›©ø» Áõ´

²Origin - m%Njh - ÷uõØÓ®

²Cyclone - jdiq<sh - `ÓõÁÎ

²Swirl of winds - iq<x m%jdy - PõØ÷Óõmh®

²Aridness - Y=Ial;dj - Áµm]z ußø©

For free distribution

103

Many factors such as Sri Lanka being an island, the internal landscape , location within a tropical climatic zone and the high population affect the the occurrence of many natural hazards in Sri Lanka.

Landslides, floods, cyclones, lightning, and Tsunami are the major natural hazards that occur in Sri Lanka.

Landslides are a common phenomenon in the mountainous regions, especially in the hill country wet zone.

Fig.7.1- Land slide

7

Natural hazards in Sri Lanka

Studying about the natural hazards that occur in Sri Lanka, along with their impacts, methods to face them and ways of mitigating their impact, is the objective of this chapter.

If we could maintain the manmade human landscape, built to meet the demands of the community, free of hazards, it would help in accelerating the socio economic development of the country. It is evident that the frequency in the occurrence of hazard like landslides, floods, droughts are increasing in Sri Lanka. Building the human landscape without paying any concern to the physical environment and irregular management of the environment have adversely affected in intensifying such hazards.

Landslides

The sudden movement of soil, rocks and vegetation cover on a slope in an elevated area towards the lower areas can be called a landslide.

Map 7.1 indicates seven districts in Sri Lanka which have been identified as areas prone to landslides by the Disaster Management Center.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

104

Reasons for landslides

Natural reasons as well as human activities have affected the occurrence of landslides.

Map 7.1 - Areas affected by landslides

Signs of an impending landslide

Particular changes in the immediate environment indicate the occurrence of a landslide in near future. The damage can be minimized if these features are identified accurately. Some of such signs are mentioned below.

²Appearance of cracks on houses and other buildings.

²Sinking or appearance of cracks in the land area.

²Inclination of trees, lamp posts and telephone posts in the area. ²Dying of large trees on slopes instantly. ²Changes in water sources in the lower areas of slopes.

²Changes in the behavioural patterns of certain animals.

Natural reasons

²Occurrence of tremors. ²Heavy, incessant rainfall. ²Steep slopes in mountains. ² Structure of the stone layers and weathering of them. ²Poor drainage pattern. ²Decrease of the vegetation cover.

Human activities

²Improper use of the lands with slopes.

²Clearing the forests on slopes.

²Obstructing natural water ways.

²Mining in mountainous areas.

²Removal of earth, quarrying and breaking rocks using explosives.

²Improper constructions on mountain slopes.

For free distribution

105

Steps taken to minimize the hazard of landslides.

² Protection of the vegetation covers on lands with slopes.

²Not obstructing the natural drainage pattern.

²Following scientific instructions when using lands with slopes.

²Not building reservoirs in elevated areas.

²Not constructing buildings in the lands with steep slopes.

²Taking steps to protect the stability of the land areas with slopes. Examples-retaining walls, drains and forestation etc.

²Community awareness programme.

Activities

1. Explain what a land slide is.

2. Name and shade the districts identified by the Disaster Management Center in Sri Lanka as the areas threatened with landslide risks.

3. Explain in brief the damages caused by landslides.

Fig. 2.7 - A flooded area

Floods

Floods can be identified as the most common natural hazard in Sri Lanka. Floods can be seen in the areas that receive heavy rain and in the river basins and the areas around the estuaries of Kelani, Kalu, Gin, Nilwala, Mahaoya and Mahaweli rivers. Floods occur suddenly as a result of a rise in the water level of rivers and overflowing the either sides of the valleys and also as a consequence of obstructions of water ways. This hazard can be mostly seen in urban areas close to low lands. The human activity in the areas blocking the places where water drains naturally during heavy rains, intensifies the risk of floods in such areas.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

106

The areas subjected to frequent floods. ²Low lands around river basins and estuaries. ²Urban areas located close to rivers. ²Eg: Colombo, Kalutara, Matara and Ratnapura. ²Low lands around tanks and reservoirs.

Reasons that affect the floods.

Natural reasons as well as human activities cause floods.

At present, it is clear that human activities cause floods than natural reasons.

²Steps that can be taken to minimize the flood hazard. ²Not clearing the forests in the catchment areas. ²Keeping the estuaries open. ²Protection of the low lands and wet lands. ²Limiting the sand mining in rivers. ²Constructing buildings resistant to floods. ²Limiting human activities at the places where the tanks and rivers overflow. ²Community awareness programmes.

Activities

1. Name and mark some river basins in Sri Lanka, which are frequently flooded during the rainy seasons.

2. Name and mark some urban areas which are frequently flooded in the map you have drawn.

3. Draw a flooded area and colour it.

4. Write three steps that have to be taken to minimize floods.

For free distribution

107

Cyclone

The depressions in the atmosphere that develop in the areas around the Bay of Bengal move as cyclones towards India or Sri Lanka. In Sri Lanka, cyclones occur mostly in the Northern and Eastern regions during the period from October to December. Map 7.2 indicates several districts which are mostly affected by cyclones. Even though Fig. 7.3 - A cyclone in bay of Bengale

Although the general public could not identify this hazard beforehand, the meteorologists can identify it through the Satellite technology. Therefore, weather forecasts are useful to mitigate the impacts of this hazard to a certain level.

Steps that can be taken to minimize the impact of cyclones.

²Paying attention to the weather reports.

²Removing trees grown close to houses.

²Making the roofs of houses stable.

²Preparation of strong wind shields.

²Moving to a place of protection when there is a strong wind.

Fig. 7.4 - District affect by cyclones

heavy damages are not reported frequently, the cyclone that hit the country in November 1978 incurred heavy losses and many lives were lost too.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

108

Drought

Various countries in the world have different definitions related to ‘drought’. There are different ideas presented in Sri Lanka too. According to the report of climatic changes prepared by the Ministry of Forest resources and Environment, the duration of receiving less than 75% of expected rainfall in Sri Lanka is called the time duration that causes drought. However, the time periods of droughts in Sri Lanka vary in different areas.

Activities

1. Shade the areas in Sri Lanka which are affected by cyclones in an outline map of Sri Lanka.2. Mention the damages that are caused due to cyclones and write three steps that can be taken to minimize them.

Fig. 7.4 - Cultivated land affected by drought

Fig. Map 7.3 - Areas affected by constant droughts

The dry zone of Sri Lanka experiences a drought condition once in every three or four years. It is identified that drought condition that affects the whole Sri Lanka occurs in every ten years.

Reasons that cause droughts.

²Climatic changes.

²Increase in global warming.

²Pollution of the atmosphere.

²Destruction of forests.

²Unexpected scarcity of water.

For free distribution

109

Steps that can be taken to minimize the impact of a drought.

²Storage of rain water. ²Conservation of water sources and protection of the vegetation cover. ²Using water sparingly. ²Preference towards crops with water efficiency.

Fig. 7.5 - Lightning

Lightning

Lightning is a natural phenomenon which is identified as a very common hazard in Sri Lanka. Especially during inter monsoonal period with the convectional process, lightning can be seen throughout the island.

The reason for lightning is the higher cumulus clouds forming under unstable

Activities

1. Mark and shade districts which are affected by droughts in a district map of Sri Lanka.2. Name some crops resistant to droughts at least to a certain extent.3. “Human activities affect the occurrence of droughts more than natural causes” Explain this with reference to two examples.

and humid atmospheric conditions during inter monsoonal periods. The electric discharge of positive and negative charges within the cumulus clouds is called lightning.

Lightning can be divided into three categories. They are,

²Cloud lightning (discharges between clouds and clouds)

²Air lightning (discharges between clouds and space)

²Earth lightning (discharges between clouds and the earth)

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

110

More damages are caused by earth lightning that occurs between the clouds and the earth. Although earth lightning may occur at any place in Sri Lanka, it has been identified more damage would cause in the areas that receive inter monsoonal rain in abundance.

Lightning causes more damages like loss of lives and destruction of property in Sri Lanka. According to the reports of the Disaster Management Center about 50 lives are lost annually due to lightning .In addition to that; taller buildings and electrical appliances are damaged mostly at the occasions of this hazard.

Steps that could be taken to prevent from lightning.

²Use earth wires connected to the electric circuits of buildings and houses.

²Install lightning conductors on taller buildings.

²Fix a trip switch to the electric supply at home.

²Disconnect electric and electronic appliances when lightning.

²Avoid staying in open spaces or under single trees.

²Avoid touching metals when lightning.

²Be alert and making others also aware about the hazard during a period of strong lightning.

Activities

1. Mention the time period that lightning occurs mostly in Sri Lanka.

2. Explain the damages caused by lightning.

Tsunami

Sri Lanka had to undergo the tragic experiences of Tsunami catastrophe on the 26th of December 2004. This hazard can be considered as the most tragic natural hazard that occurred in the recent history not only to Sri Lanka but in many countries in the Southeast Asia.

Tsunami waves were triggered after an earthquake that occurred on the plate boundaries located close to Sumatra islands, in an area known for earthquakes with a higher intensity. These tsunami waves tragically destructed the Northern, Eastern and Western coastal areas in Sri Lanka.

For free distribution

111

The coastal areas of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Trincomallee, Batticaloa, Ampara, Hambantota, Matara, Galle and Kalutara districts were severely damaged.The death toll recorded was about 35000 while 500000 were recorded as displaced. Property and ecosystems with a immense value were too destroyed.

Steps that can be taken to minimize the damage caused by Tsunami

Fig. 7.10 –Tsunami waves

²Limiting construction work close to the coast. ²Protection of the natural eco-systems located close to the coast. ²Installing tsunami warning systems and community awareness. ²Soon after receiving tsunami warnings, evacuate from the coastal areas and move to a place with a higher elevation. ²If there are no elevated places in the vicinity, move to an upper floor of a building constructed with reinforced concrete. ²Listening to media. ²Listening to tsunami warning systems. ²Evacuate the coast when the sound of an earth quake is heard without waiting for the tsunami warning.

Activities

1. Explain what a tsunami is.

2. Shade and name the districts which were affected by tsunami hazard on the 26th of December 2004 in a district map of Sri Lanka.

Disaster Management Programme in Sri Lanka.

The disaster management programme became dynamic with the tsunami that struck on the 26th of December 2004 in Sri Lanka. A formal institutional structure was established with new laws, rules and regulations for disaster management in the year 2005.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

112

Preparation

²Attempting to identify the features that occur prior to the hazard.

²Forecasting related to the hazard.

²Preparation to face the hazard.

The institutional structure related to disaster management.

²Establishment of a ministry related to disaster management. ²Establishment of a National Disaster Management Centre (NDMC) with political leadership. ²Establishment of a Disaster Management Centre (DMC) under a director general. ²Establishment of a Disaster Management Centers in divisional secretariat divisions and district levels. ²Implementation of school programmes related to protection from hazards.

Through the above institutional structure, many community services are performed related to hazardous situations that occur at any place in Sri Lanka. Prevention from hazards, hazard mitigation, responding and rehabilitation activities related to them are included in the management programme. Not only the state sector but community based organizations and non-government organizations also actively contribute towards disaster management activities in Sri Lanka.

Disaster Management Cycle

Disaster management cycle is the model that indicates the process of hazard management. It shows a dynamic management activity from the pre-hazard level to the post – hazard level.

Fig.7.11 - Hazard management cycle

For free distribution

113

Response

Although responses may change according to each hazard the necessity of responding to any hazard is compulsory.

• Assuring the protection of the community subjected to the hazard.

• Providing medical treatments.

• Protection of physical property as much as possible.

• Providing temporary lodging.

• Providing food.

Recovery

This includes the necessity of rehabilitation of the environment and the people subjected to the hazard. Planning long term and short term actions is significant in the recovery process. This encompasses recovery of people who were both physically and mentally victimized by the hazard.

Mitigation

The steps taken to minimize the hazard are similar to the steps related to preparation. However, the risk of the hazard can be minimized through other steps.

²Installing warning systems.

²Community awareness and participation.

²Introduction of some implements that can be used to minimize the hazard.

²Strengthening disaster management institutions.

Activities

1. Name natural hazards that occur in Sri Lanka frequently.

2. Select any two hazards and prepare a list of steps that can be taken at each stage of the Disaster Management Cycle.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

114

Assignments

1. Identify the natural hazards that occur in your living area.

2. Collect information related to the natural hazards that occurred in your area and their effects and prepare an article to the school wall paper.

3. Explain in brief what you have heard about the behavioural patterns of certain animals before a natural hazard.

4. Find information through media and prepare a list including the damages caused due to lightning in Sri Lanka.

5. Prepare a poster to make people aware including the steps that could be taken to minimize the hazard of lightning.

6. Prepare a report related to the damage caused by tsunami in Sri Lanka obtaining information from newspapers and your elders to be presented to the classroom.

7. Prepare a list of proposals to uplift the physical and mental conditions of the people affected by hazards.

Bibliography and Sources

²uydpd¾h Wmd,s ùrlafldä" fN!;sl N+f.da, úoHdj »»" ^2009& l;D m%ldYkhls'

²wdpd¾h A.H. Okmd, zzmßir wOHkhZZ ^2012& iriú m%ldYlfhda'

²wdpd¾h A.H. Okmd, zziajNdúl úm;aZZ ^2008& iriú m%ldYlfhda'

²cd;sl f.dvke.s,s m¾fhaYk ixúOdkh ^NBRO&" ud¾f.damfoaYlh ^2009&

²Sri Lanka urban multi-hazard Disaster Mitigation Project (SLUMDMP) Guidelines

²Cyclones and high winds, Flood Prone Areas, Landslide Prone Areas, Lightning Strikes, Tsunami - 2003

²www.chpb.gov.lk

².=re WmfoaYl w;afmd;" zzwdmod l<ukdlrKhZZ cd;sl wOHdmk wdh;kh" uyr.u'

².=re ud¾f.damfoaY ix.%yh" N+f.da, úoHdj" 13 fY%aKsh" ^2007& cd;sl wOHdmk wdh;kh" uyr.u'

For free distribution

115

Glossary

²Cleavages - me¿ï ;, - ¤ÍÄz uÍ[PÒ

²Run off - wmOdjh - PÊÄ }÷µõmh®

²Cloud lightning - j,d wl=Kq - •QÀ ªßÚÀ

²Air lightning - jdhq wl=K - ÁÎ ªßÚÀ

²Earth lightning - mDÓú wl=Kq - ¦ÂªßÚÀ

²Lightning conductor - wl=Kq ikakdhl - ªßÚÀ uõ[Q

²Disaster management cycle - wdmod l<ukdlrK pl%h - AÚºzu •Põø©zxÁ Ámh®

²Preparation - fmr iqodku - •ßÚõ¯zu®

²Response - m%;spdr oelaùu - Gvº öPõÒÍÀ

²Recovery - h:d ;;a;ajhg m;aùu - £øÇ¯ {ø»USz v¸®£À

²Mitigation - wju lsÍu - uo¨¦

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

116

Climatic Changes

8

Flora and fauna in a particular region is adapted to the climatic conditions prevalent in that region. The human activities too are adapted to the climatic and the other physical conditions in that region. The modern man is advanced in science and technology even to carry out certain human activities under controlled environmental factors. Some human activities are not eco-friendly and have harmful effects on the environment. Some examples are,

²Mining of mineral oil resources in the North Sea. ²Air conditioning. ²Commercial dairy farming. ²Burning of fossil fuels. ²Deforestation ²Nuclear experiments. ²Disposal of solid waste.

The above activities have caused changes in many cyclic processes in the physical environment. Thus we have to face many unfavourable consequences such as Global warming. Climatic changes are quite significant among them.

Certain environmental processes take place gradually and in a cyclic manner. When they occur suddenly, it brings about changes in the atmospheric composition and results global warming. This condition eventually creates extreme conditions in the climate.

As a result, changes have occurred in patterns of winds, droughts, cyclones, duration of receiving rainfall and the intensity of rainfall and environmental temperature. These changes can be called climatic changes. Accordingly, the long term or short term changes occurring in the general climatic pattern on earth are identified as climatic changes.

The objective of this chapter is to study the climatic changes, phenomena that cause climatic changes, impact of the climatic changes on physical and human environment and about the global agreements and conventions related to this issue.

For free distribution

117

The short wave solar radiation from the Sun is reflected back to space as long wave radiation (terrestrial radiation). Due to the effect of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere the rising terrestrial radiation remain in the earth’s atmosphere and this is called the natural greenhouse effect. An atmosphere conducive for for the living beings is created on earth due to this phenomenon. However, due to various

Green house Process

Clouds CoverRain

Solar Short Waves

Solar Short Waves

Geo radiation

Co2O2

O2Co2

Co2CFC

Fig.8.1 - Change in environment cycles and their impacts.

human activities, an exceeding amount of greenhouse gases is emitted to the atmosphere. These gases absorb more radiation and in turn warm up the atmosphere. This causes an increase in global warming. (Accelerated Greenhouse Effect)

Human activities as well as natural reasons have affected the increase in global warming.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

118

Human activities as well as natural reasons have affected the increase in global warming.

Human activities

²Burning and over using fossil fuel.

²Deforestation

²Industrialization

²Animal husbandry (ruminants)

²Disposal of solid waste

²Setting fire

²Nuclear experiments

Natural reasons ²Eruption of volcanoes ²Bushfires ²Natural marshy lands ²Changes in the space ²Sun spots

Increase in global warming may cause the following unfavourable situations. ²Occurrence of climatic changes. ²Rise in sea level due to melting ice in polar regions. ²Destruction of lagoons and salinization of water. ²Increase of temperature in oceans and destruction of aquatic organisms. ²Occurrence of cyclones due to increase in the temperature on the surface of oceans. ²Change of climatic boundary zones. ²Extinction of certain animals and emergence of new species. ²Destructions of animal genes and creations of abnormalities. ²Destruction of crops and decrease of yield. ²Changes in animal breeding zones. ²Pollution of drinking water sources.

The impact of climatic changes on human activities.

²Decrease in income of fishermen due to the reduction of fish harvest. ²Decrease of the crop lands due to salinity of soil.

For free distribution

119

²Spread of diseases due to increase in numbers of the insects that transmits diseases (vectors). ²Decrease in the harvest of agro-crops. ²Increase in natural hazards (cyclones, droughts and heavy rainfall). ²Obstruction for agricultural activities due to the changes in the patterns of rainfall. ²Loss of settlements when lowlands submerge in sea. ²Contamination of drinking water.

Minimizing climatic changes

Citizens in any country do not like to stay away from the lifestyle they enjoy, personally or commonly, or to be satisfied by fulfilling their needs at the minimum level. If they do, it is possible to refrain from unfavourable environment restricted activities or to minimize such human activities.

Following are some of the activities that can be done to minimize climatic changes.

²Less consumption of energy sources that emit green house gases. ²Motivation to use energy sources such as wind and solar power. ²Using organic manure for crop cultivation instead of chemical fertilizers. ²Management of solid waste materials. ²Expansion of afforestation. ²Introduction of mixed crops and multi crops. ²Using common transportation facilities.

Steps that have been taken to minimize climatic changes at a global level.

Both developed and developing countries are continuously engaged in development activities. While employing development strategies each and every country has contributed towards global warming and occurrence of climatic changes. Contribution to the climatic changes varies according to the capacity of energy and fossil fuel consumption of each country. The “World Conservation Strategies” were prepared by the “International Forum of Nature Conservation” as

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

120

a result of understanding this situation. Funds are provided by the United Nations Environment Protection programme and the World Wild Life Fund for that mission. They have three main objectives;

²To maintain essential ecological processes and life-support systems. ²To preserve genetic diversity. ²To ensure the sustainable utilization of species of flora and fauna and eco systems

Following are the milestones of this programme.

²Stockholm Summit held in 1972. ²Brundtland Commission Report. (1987) ²Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 (International Conference on Environment and Development).

It was proposed to prepare a programme on environment and development for the 21st century at the conference held at Rio de Janeiro in 1992, with the participation of delegates from 172 countries.

Sri Lanka too agreed to the decisions made at this conference as a member country. As a result, a number of programmes were proposed to be implemented simultaneously at national level for the preparation of better surroundings in the environment.

²Minimizing activities that emit CFC gas and complete elimination after 2000. ²Vehicle emission tests. ²Solid waste management. ²Minimizing the use of fossil fuels. ²Protection of global bio-diversity by protecting animal and plant species. ²Consumption of regenerating energy (solar power ,wind power and hydro electricity). ²Green forest cultivation, tree planting programmes, roof-top cultivation, using organic fertilizer.

For free distribution

121

Inter-governmental Panel on Climatic Change. (IPCC)

Climatic changes is a theme which has drawn attention of many in the world recently. Therefore, the United Nations Organization established the Inter governmental Panel on Climatic Change (IPCC) in 1988.The membership for this organization is granted for those members of World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Project (UNEP). At present, 120 countries have received the membership of this organization. According to the programme Convention of the United Nations the organization of Inter governmental Panel of Climatic Changes provides reports about the climatic changes of these areas.

The Nobel Prize was awarded to both IPCC and ALGORE in 2007 for the reports published on world climatic changes.

Glossary

² Animal and plant community - i;a;aj yd Ydl m%cdj - Â»[S ©ØÖ® uõÁµ CÚ[PÒ

² Air conditioning - jdhq iukh lsÍu - SÎ¹mkuÀ

² Commercial dairy farming - jHdmdßl .jmÜá md,kh - ÁºzuP £õØ £søn

² Fossil fuel burning - fmdis, bkaOk oykh - E°º _Ámk G›ö£õ¸Ò uPÚ®

² Nuclear testing - kHIaál w;ayod ne,Su - Aq¨ £›÷\õuøÚ

² Intensity of rainfall - j¾Idfõ ;Sj%;dj - ©øÇÃÌa]a ö\ÔÄ

² Global agreements - f.da,Sh tlÕ;d - §÷PõÍ J¨£¢u[PÒ

² Short waves - flá ;rx. - ]ØÓø»PÒ

² Long waves - È.= ;rx. - ö|mhø»PÒ

² Green-house effect - yß;d.dr wdprKh - £aø\ Ãmk ÂøÍÄ

² Global warming - f.da,Sh WIAK;ajh - §÷PõÍ® öÁ¨£©øhuÀ

² Sunspots - iQ¾h ,m - `›¯¨ ¦ÒÎPÒ

² Animal breeding zones - i;a;aj wNsckkSh l,dm - Â»[QÚ[PÎß P»¨¤Ú Á»¯[PÒ

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

122

²Bio-assisted systems - ffcj iydhl moaO;s - E°º & EuÂz öuõSvPÒ

²Renewable energy - m%;sckk n,Yla;s - «Ð¸ÁõUPa \Uv

²Green forestation - yß; jk j.dj - £_ø©U PõhõUP®

²Tree Planting Programmes - rela frdamK jevigyka - ©µ |køP {PÌa]z vmh®

²Balcony cultivation - i|¿;, j.dj - ©õi Ãmkz ÷uõmha ö\´øP

²Intergovernmental Panel on - foaY.=K úm¾hdi ms<sn| - Põ»{ø» ©õØÓ[PÒ öuõhº£õÚ

Climate Change (IPCC) wka;¾ wdKavq uKav,h Aµ\õ[PÐU Qøh°»õÚ SÊ

²United Nations Programmes - tlai;a cd;Skaf.a jevigyka - IUQ¯ |õkPÎß

Convention m%{ma;sh {PÌa]z vmha \©Áõ¯®

For free distribution

123

The physical features of a 1: 50 000 topographic map

A map is very important to have a total study of the landscape of a particular area. You have already studied about maps, basic features of thematic maps and topographical maps and peripheral information of maps in Grade 10.

9

1: 50 000 Topographical Maps of Sri Lanka

The objective of this chapter is to study about the physical and cultural features in topographic maps, learn to draw a cross section of a physical landscape and learn to interpret maps in this lesson.

There are many features such as the topographic features , drainage, coastal features, natural vegetation, administrative boundaries, transport routes, cultivation, settlements and several other specific features on a mapped area of topographical maps,. These features can be classified as natural made and manmade features. They are also known as physical features and cultural features respectively.

When you learn about the peripheral information and information on the map face of a 1:50,000 topographical map you will be able to read the map and obtain complete knowledge about the mapped area.

Features which are naturally formed on land are known as physical features.

These physical features can be divided into four main parts.

²Relief features. ²Drainage features. ²Coastal features. ²Natural vegetation.

p

Activity

Identify and name the physical and cultural features found in the area surrounding of your school or home.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

124

The Relief Features

Different landforms on the surface of the Earth are represented by contour lines on 1: 50 000 topographic maps. The places with equal height are marked after measuring the height of a certain area .Then lines are drawn on a map connecting the places with equal height. These lines are known as contour lines.

The value of each contour line is marked by height. The contour line interval is 20 m. The index contour lines such as 100 m, 200 m, and 300 m are drawn as dark thick lines in brown. Intermediate contour lines between two index contour lines are marked in light brown at 20 meter intervals. All the contour lines are not marked with the height. In mountainous areas where there are more contour lines, the index contour lines like 100, 200, 300 are marked with the value and the values of intermediate contour lines are determined according to the interval between two index contour lines.

As the contour line gap becomes wide in areas with extending plains, spot height is shown to get the idea about the elevation of the region. The height of the mountain peaks are also shown by trigonometrical stations. There is a note on contour lines in peripheral information of the topographical maps. Various lands forms like plains, mountain ranges, plateaus, valleys, spur and slopes can be identified by studying height, gap and spreading of the contour lines.

Identifying Relief FeaturesPlain

A plain is a flat area on the land. Flat land can be identified on a map either by the limitation of contour lines to few or by the wide gap between two contour lines. The change of the height that occurs here and there, in these regions can be understood by the spot height.

Fig. 9.1 - The Plain

For free distribution

125

Undulating Land

The region of a plain that consists of slightly higher lands and low lands is known as undulating land. Such undulating feature can be found mostly in the coastal regions of Sri Lanka. The undulating lands on maps can be identified by the location of contour lines that show the scattered high lands between two contour lines with a wide interval.

High Lands

A land with a higher elevation located in a particular area is known as a highland. More contour lines are located in a high land and they run very close to each other. Different landforms like mountain ranges, plateaus and spurs are found in a high land.

Valley and Spur

A Valley is an elongated low land mostly located between two high lands with a river flowing through. Valleys can be identified in low lands as well as in high lands. Wide shallow valleys in low

SpurValley

Fig. 9.2 - Undulating Land

Fig. 9.3 - Highland. Valley Spur

lands and narrow deep valleys in high land regions are seen. Since the contour lines extend towards the high land in a V shape, a valley can be identified easily.

The part of high land that extends towards the low land with contour lines is called spur. In a spur the contour lines spread pointing towards the low land.

Mountain Range/ Ridge

High lands that extend with a narrow elongated shape are known as mountain ranges. Such mountain ranges are mostly found in the central hills of Sri Lanka. Lands

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

126

Fig. 9.4 - Mountain Range.

Fig. 9.5 - Mountain Peak.

Fig. 9.6 - Conical Hill

Mountain Peak

The height of the peaks located in a mountain range is shown by a trigonometrically station. There may be several peaks located at different heights in a mountain range.Isolated Hill and Conical Hill

Solitary low hilly regions scattered in flat lands are called isolated hills. Generally they are around 100 to 200 meters in height. When an isolated hill is located in the shape of a cone, it is known as conical hill. In a conical hill contour lines extend in circles.

Slopes

High lands can have different types of slopes. These slopes can be identified by the gap among the contour lines and by how they spread. If contour lines extend at a distance from each other gentle slope is shown and if the contour lines extend close to each other a steep slope is shown. Location of contour lines very close to each other is a special feature of an escarpment. On some occasions .contour lines in an escapement extend very closely like over lapping. Waterfalls are formed mostly, associated with escarpments. Sometimes, gentle slopes and steep slopes could be found even on the same slope. When a gentle slope is located on the higher part of a slope and a steep slope is located on the lower part of it, it is called convex slope.

with low height extending continuously in flat lands are called ridges.

For free distribution

127

When a steep slope is on the higher part of the slope and a gentle slope on the lower part on the slope are seen, it is called a concave slope.

Gap

The lower region located between either two mountain ranges or between two peaks of a mountain range is known as a gap. If a river flows through a gap it is a water gap / pass. In the construction of roads in hilly areas such gaps are utilized to build the roads through them.

Activity

Select a part of a topographic map and draw the physical features of that region.

Fig. 9.7 - Features of Slope

Fig. 9.8 - GapFig. 9.8 - Water pass / gap

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

128

The cross section is useful to identify the Physical Landscape of a certain area clearly.

Drawing a Cross Section of a physical Landcape

Map 9.1 - Topographic Map

The plan that is drawn to a scale to show the profile of a certain Physical Landscape on a line drawn joining two places on a map is called a cross section.

Drawing a Cross Section

Step one.

²First draw a line (A-B line) joining two relevant places as shown on the map 9.1.

²To draw the base line, draw a line equal to the length of the A-B line. Draw two vertical lines at the ends of this line and mark the vertical scale on one line. While the scale of the map is the horizontal scale, suitable scale can be used for the vertical scale. Consider the elevation of the mapped area when determining it. According to the above map, elevation of the mapped area is seen just above 0- 600m. It is appropriate to use 1 cm=100 m( 2mm=20 m) as vertical scale to show this elevation. Draw the sufficient number of horizontal lines parallel to the base line to that interval so as to show the relevant elevation.

For free distribution

129

Step two.

²Take a sheet of paper for the creation of the cross section and line up an edge of it on the A-B line drawn on the map. ²Mark the places where contour lines meet the base line with dots or dash alone the edge of the paper and write the values of the contour lines.

Step Three

²Line up the edge of the paper on the base line of the graph you have drawn. Next, move the edge of the paper to the 100 m line and marked the places where 100 m height is marked, on the scale line of the graph by a dot.. Next take the paper to the 200 m scale line and mark the places as you have done before. So mark all the heights on the relevant scale lines of the graph. ²When all the places have been marked join the dots by a line. When the mountain top is drawn draw the line there without touching the above scale line in to a shape of a peak.. In low valleys, draw the line without touching the lower line moving downwards from the dotted places in to a shape of a valley. ²To complete the drawing of the cross section join the line to two vertical lines considering the elevations of beginning and ending points. ²By shading the part that shows the landform with light brown, the landscape is clearly shown.

Fig. 9.11 - Cross section

In the drawing of a cross section the following features must be there. ²The heading should be stated. ²Mark “m” (metre) at the top terminal of the vertical axis.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

130

²Mark “0” at the beginning of the vertical axis. ²State the vertical and horizontal scales. ² When a cross section is drawn to show a higher region, after contracting the vertical scale from zero to the beginning of the elevation, relevant elevations must be marked.

Activity

Draw the cross sections of above described valley, spur, concave slope, convex slope and conical hill following the instructions given by the teacher.

The Drainage Features

A river originates as a small stream in a hilly region. When several small water ways get collected a tributary is formed and when several tributaries join together the main river is formed.

When the main river, all its tributaries and streams connected to the tributaries are considered together, it is called a river system. There are 103 main river systems in Sri Lanka.

Most rivers begin in the central hills and flow through the low plains following the relief of the land before falling into the sea at different places in the island.

Fig. 9.11 - River system

Due to the flow of the rivers through longitudinal valleys located between two mountain ranges or between two high lands and through transverse valleys that run across mountain ranges, different types of drainage patterns are formed.

R

i

v e

r

s y

s

t

e

m

For free distribution

131

Fig. 9.13. - Catchment area and watershed

Fig. 9.12. - Longitudinal valley and Transverse valley.

Catchment area and Watershed

The region from where a

certain river collects water or

the region that feeds a river is

the catchment area. When several

tributaries flow into the main river

in the catchment area, the main

river is fed. The central hill is the

catchment area for most rivers

of Sri Lanka. The boundary that

divides two river systems is called

water shed. When rivers flow on

either side of one mountain,

the top of that mountain range

becomes the water shed.

Waterfall

Most often, when rivers flow, even with a less volume of water, through narrow valleys in high lands with escarpments waterfalls are formed. Several waterfalls formed in such a manner can be seen in the central hills. Waterfalls such as Dunhinda, Bambarakanda, Diyaluma can be shown as examples.

W

a

t

e

r

she

d

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

132

MeanderThe feature that is known as a meander is formed when a river begins to flow in a circular path due to the blocking of the river course by the deposition of the river burden as river flows very slowly through wide valleys in flat areas.

Marshy Land

Marshy lands are formed due to the logging of water in the low lands associated with rivers. Blocking of the water ways of rivers too is a cause for the formation of marshy lands. Collection of rain water in low lands also causes to form marshy lands. Marshy lands are represented in topographical maps by a special symbol.

Braided River

When features like small islands are formed in the river due to the deposition of sediments in the middle of the river while the river flows very slowly through low plains, it is called a braided river.

Distributaries

A river which flows across low land at slow speed divides itself into several channels, flows is into main river after a short distance, is called cut off channels. Some rivers divide themselves into several channels at the river mouth and flow to the sea. These channels are known as distributaries. Eg. River Mahaveli flows into the sea through several distributaries at Trincomalee.

Fig. 9.15. - Radial drainage pattern

Fig. 9.14 - Marshy land, Meander and Braided river

Drainage Patterns

The drainage pattern of a certain area is formed by the relief and the composition of rocks of that region. The drainage pattern that is formed due to the flow of rivers into different directions from the high land where they get originated is called radial drainage pattern. The total drainage pattern of Sri Lanka that consists of

For free distribution

133

Fig. 9.17 - The Dendritic Drainage Pattern

T

r

a

n

s

v

e

r

s

e

v

all

e

y

.

Longitu

di

nal Valley

a central hills in the mid of the island and low lands around it shows the features of the radial drainage pattern.

If the tributaries of a river system join the main river in the shape of branches of a tree is called a dendritic drainage pattern. In most of the river systems of Sri Lanka a dendritic drainage pattern can be seen.

When the tributaries of a river system meet the main river at a right angle forming the shape of a grid, it is called trellis drainage pattern. This drainage pattern can be identified in the south western plain of Sri Lanka. The location of the longitudinal and transverse valleys associated with the parallel ridges located in the south western region of the island has contributed for the formation of such drainage pattern.

The main rivers like Kelani, Kalu flow from the central hills through the transverse valleys of the south western parallel ridges and the tributaries join the main rivers flowing through the longitudinal valleys located among the parallel ridges. On the 1: 50 000 topographic maps of South Western region of Sri Lanka such trellis drainage pattern can be seen.

Coastal Features

The relief features can be seen in the coastal areas on 1:50 000 topographic maps too belong to the physical features.

Lagoon, bay, head/point, sandbar, river mouth islands are the distinct topographical features of the coastal region. These coastal features are formed due to the erosion and deposition that occur along the coast line. Rivers flowing from the inland, structure of the rocks of the coast line and tides are some factors that have led to the formation of coastal features.

Fig. 9.16. - Radial drainage pattern

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

134

Map 9.2 - Coastal features

Sand bank

The sand brought by the waves and the rivers being deposited along the coastal belt leads to the formation of sand banks.

BayThe indented area of the sea towards the land with a bigger opening to the sea is a bay. Arugam Bay, Kottiyar Bay, and Weligam Bay can be shown as examples. Bays are used as fishing habours where small fishing boats are anchored.

Islands A land surrounded by water on all sides is known as island. In Sri Lanka on the North, West and Southwestern there are many such islands located close to the coast line of Sri Lanka. Delfts, Kayts, Nainativu are few islands located in the coastal region of North.

River Mouth

The place where a river flows to the sea is a river mouth. There are sand banks formed near the mouth of the river and also marshy lands close to the lands of the river mouth.

Point/ Head

The narrow land on the coastal belt jutting out to the sea is known as “point” Dondra Head, Point Pedro and Sangamankanda Point are examples.

Lagoon The topographical feature that is formed when the sea indents towards the land and is separated by a sand belt but with a small opening towards the sea is termed a lagoon. Eg: Negombo, Batticaloa and puttalam

For free distribution

135

Natural Vegetation - The scrubs, forests, grasslands and mangroves that grow naturally on the land belong to by the natural vegetation. They are shown on topographic maps symbols. Relief, soil and climate influence the distribution of the natural vegetation.

Identifying Cultural Features of a topographic map

The way how man has utilized the land and features formed on it can be identified as cultural features. In the key of the topographic maps these cultural features have been indicated mainly under the headings of boundaries, tourist information, roads and paths, and railway lines. Some cultural features have been mainly included under the headings of drainage, natural vegetation and general features.

The way how the distribution of human activities that is formed on the physical landscape is represented by using different symbols and colors, can be understood by reading the map.

Fig. 9.18 - Forest and scrubsFig. 9.19 - Grass land

Activity

Neatly draw the symbols that represent the cultural features under relevant main headings after studying the conventional signs of a 1:50 000 topographic maps.

A topographic map represents the total landscape of a region. While the physical landscape can be understood by the identification of physical features, human landscape can be understood by the identification of cultural features.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

136

Types of Boundaries All the administrative boundaries on 1: 50 000 topographic maps are shown in red using different symbols. Though the boundaries of sanctuaries and forest reserves are included among them features that belong to the physical environment can be found in sanctuaries. It must be understood that though these boundaries are seen on the maps , they are invisible cultural features on the land. When you observe a map it will be clear to you that physical features like rivers, mountain ranges are used as the boundaries that divide the administrative units.

Tourist information

Information like the rest house, the hotel, historical places necessary for the tourists, are presented by symbols on the topographic maps. It is important to be well aware of these symbols and colors which are used to represent each feature when reading maps.

RoadsThe symbols that represent roads on topographic maps are given under the headings of roads and paths and railway lines. Though the recently constructed express ways have not been shown on the maps, they will be included on the maps printed in future.

Water Supply

The symbols that represent tanks and irrigation that show the water supply in a certain region come under the cultural features. These features are shown by the symbols under drainage.

Cultivated lands

Cultivated lands that come under cultural features are shown under vegetations on topographical maps. The symbols which are used to identify the chief crops cultivated like paddy, tea, rubber, coconut and other crops as well as home gardens are included here. When cultivated lands are represented, paddy lands are shown in green, home gardens in yellow, green symbols on a yellow background are used for other crops. It is very important to have a correct identification of all crop cultivations by symbols, when the landscape of the mapped area is interpreted.

For free distribution

137

Special Buildings

Special buildings come under the "other features" category. Permanent buildings are shown using a small black square and special buildings are shown using a square a bit larger than that. The name of the special building is mentioned on the map. Significant public buildings are shown using symbols and they can be identified as public service centres and religious buildings. The built up areas marked in pink on urban areas are significant among the cultural features.

Different symbols used to depict cultural features are not drawn to a scale. Therefore, they are to be considered only as symbols used to identify different cultural features.

Map 9.3 - The cultural Features.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

138

Interpreting Maps

Both the physical landscape created by nature itself and the cultural landscape that has been built on it by man over a longer period, are represented by the 1: 50 000 topographic maps. Hence by reading a map it becomes clear that there is an important relationship between the physical features and cultural features of the mapped area. The establishment of the road pattern, agricultural land use pattern, irrigation system and the settlement pattern compatible with the relief pattern of a certain area can be shown as examples.

When topographic maps are observed a road pattern that spread straight in the flat areas and a road pattern that runs through passes with bends in hilly areas can be identified. The roads in hilly areas are mostly built along the river valleys.

When the agricultural land use of the mapped area is considered, it becomes clear that crops are grown to match the land. Wide paddy lands in low plain areas and associated with river valleys , narrow long paddy lands in river valleys in hilly areas , tea cultivation in hilly regions rubber cultivation in gentle slope regions , coconut cultivation in coastal and suburb regions and Chena cultivation close to the scrub forests in the districts of the Dry Zones can be cited as example.

When the water supply of a certain region is considered, the features like construction of large irrigation systems associated with the river valleys, construction of tanks blocking the rivers that flow through the narrow gaps by building dams joining the spurs of the ridges located on either side of the rivers and cultivation of the lands located below the dam can be identified as the cultural features formed compatible to the relief of the land.

Activity

Studying the conventional signs on 1:50 000 topographic maps, draw and name the cultural features represented on the map 9.3 using relevant colors and symbols.

For free distribution

139

When maps are observed it is clear that the relief of any area influences

the formation of the human settlement pattern . While the settlements spread

over a wide area in plains, scattered small settlements can be found located

in valleys in hilly areas. When interpreting maps, attention must be focused

on both settlement pattern and also the type of settlement . According to the

distribution of settlements linear, cluster and a scattered settlement patterns

can be identified. A linear settlement pattern along the roads and narrow land

belts and cluster settlement patterns at road junctions can be seen.

According to the life pattern of the people different settlements like

tank settlements, fishing settlements, estate settlements can be identified.

Settlements are again divided as rural and urban settlements. While hospitals,

main post offices, main banks, courts, police stations are located in a town,

several roads also get connected there. Railway stations too are located at

some places. In topographic maps, such places are shown in pink as built up

areas. Rural settlements can be identified by sub post offices, other roads, cart

tracks, foot paths etc.

Physical features are mostly utilized in delimitation of the administrative

borders. It becomes clear when topographic maps are observed that the

administrative borders have been set along mountain ranges and rivers.

An idea about the social identity in the human community can be obtained

when interpreting maps. Presence of different types of religious centres

within a region itself, diversity of religions as well as type of communities can

be identified.

Activity

With the teacher’s advice, present the human and physical landscape of your own region or where your school is located using conventional signs, colors and symbols. Prepare a key to the conventional signs. Any land area can be selected according to your preference.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

140

Do the following exercises using the 1: 50 000 topographic maps supplied to you on pages 139-143 in the text book itself.

Exercise -01

1. Write the relief features of the mapped area represented by the lines A-B, C-D, E-F selecting them from the brackets.

i. A-B (Convex slope, concave slope, gentle slope)

ii. C-D (spur, valley, gap)

iii. E-F (plain, undulated land, conical hill)

2. Identify and name the features represented by the numbers 01 -10

3. Mark whether following statements are correct or incorrect by writing “R” If right and “W” if wrong.

i. The paddy cultivation of the region is conducted utilizing irrigation.

ii. A broad gauge double railway line distributed in the North Western quarter of the mapped area.

iii. The length of the B 294 main road is roughly 9 km. ( Reference to the Km posts).

iv. The elevation of the ridge located at the centre of the mapped area is above 400m.

v. The Southwestern quarter of the mapped area is covered with scrub lands and forests.

4. Name five public buildings, types of roads and types cultivation found in the square marked on the map.

5. In which climatic zone is the mapped area located? Give reasons for this identification.

6. What are the factors that should be considered when a short cut road is constructed from Siyambalawe to Ulpothagama.

7. Draw the cross section of X-Y.

For free distribution

141

Exercise -02.

1. Identify and name the coastal features shown by 1-5 in the map.

2. Write the numbers which represent the following drainage patterns selecting from the map. ( 5,6,7,8 are used).

²Meander

²Cut off Channel.

²Marshy Land.

²River Mouth.

3. Write whether following statements are correct or incorrect by writing “ R “ if right and “ W “ if wrong.

i. Coconut is the main crop grown in the mapped area.

ii. Settlements are mainly distributed along the coastal region of the mapped area.

iii. Total land area of the mapped region is seen flat in nature.

iv. A District Boundary runs in the north western quarter of the mapped area.

v. The distance of the road B 465 that spreads northward from the place where The Divisional Secretariat is located up to the first bridge

is 5 Km.

4. i. Name four main crops found in the mapped area.

ii. Explain the relationship between the crop cultivation and the relief.

5. State the area of the mapped region in square kilometers.

6. Name the physical and cultural features found in the square marked on the map.

7. State the latitudinal location of the place.

8. State three factors that can be utilized to develop the tourist industry in coastal region.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

142

Exercise -03.

1. According to the scale of the map how many centimeters are used to show the distance of 1 Km.

2. Draw the linear scale to represent that scale. ( 1: 50 000)

3. Select the relevant number from 1-6 given in the map and re arranges the fol-lowing drainage features in order.

²River valley. ²Braided river. ²Meander. ²Main River. ²Tributary. ²Watershed.

4. Name three religious places located within 1 km2 at the Ginigathhena Junction.

5. State whether following statements are right or wrong by writing “ R” if right and “w” if wrong.

i. The mapped area belongs to the Central hills relief zone.

ii. The mapped area slopes towards the South east.

iii. Paddy is the main crop cultivation in the mapped area.

iv. B 25 road that runs close to South border runs with more conspicuous bends.

v. The south west region of the mapped area is covered with scrub forests.

6. What is the maximum height of the southwestern region of the mapped area?

7. i. Name three physical features in the square marked on the map.

ii. State three industries that can be carried out utilizing them.

iii. State three factors that have contributed for the development of an urban settlement in Hathdelagama.

8. Explain how the relief and the rivers have influenced the distribution of the road network of the mapped area.

9. State two factors that you can present to determine the mapped area as a catchment area.

For free distribution

143

Exercise -04.

1. State the physical features can be found at the places marked by 1,2,3,4,5 on the map choosing from the following. ²Water pass/ Gap. ²Concave slope/ Convex slope. ²Valley/ Spur. ²Isolated hill/ Mountain range. ²Watershed/ Catchment area.

2. State whether following statements are right or wrong by writing “ W” if inwrong and “R” if right.

3. i. Total western half of the mapped area shows mountain features.

ii. A boundary of a forest reserve can be seen in the north east quarter of the mapped region.

iii. The maximum height of the land area located east of the main road rises above the 200 m.

iv.The distance of the road from the north border to the first bridge is 3 km.

v. A provincial boundary can be seen close to the northern border.

4. Name the features shown by C, D, E, F, on the map choosing from the brackets in alphabetical order.

(Abandon tank, Tank, Spot height, Boundary of sanctuary, Culvert, Bridge, Foot path, Urban council boundary.)

5. State respectively what are represented by 70-40', 270 values on the inner border of the map.

6. i. .State the distance in Km that a traveler will have to cover when walking from southern border to Northern border along the main road.

ii. Write five cultural features can be found either side of the road.

iii.Name the crops cultivated either side of the road.

iv.Name two institutions that supply the agricultural services encountered by a traveler who travels along the road.

7. Present the factors that contribute for the existence of western half of the mapped area undeveloped.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

144

8. Write two reasons to show the relationship between relief and the land use of the mapped area.

9. Write three factors that have contributed for the distribution of settlements in the central part of the mapped area.

Exercise -05.

1. Draw the figure of direction of the metric maps.

2. Write the relevant numbers of the following landforms choosing from the map

²Conical hill ²Rock outcrop ²Meander. ²Steep slope. ²Longitudinal valley. ²Braided river. ²Valley. ²Spur.

3. What is the elevation from the sea level the dam of the Rantambe reservoir is located?

4. What is the width of the river Mahaveli at the pace marked “A”.

5. i. The highest place of the mapped region is located close to the southern border. State the height of it in meters.

ii. Name the direction where the lowest region of the mapped area is located.

6. i. What is indicated by+ located close to the western border of the mapped area.

ii. Accordingly, state the latitudinal location of that place.

7. i. Name respectively the two valleys through which Uma Oya and River Ma haveli flow in the mapped area.

ii. Write two factors that have contributed to form such a drainage pattern.

8. What is the physical feature utilized in determining the provincial boundary.

9. Name three industries can be opened in the mapped area and present reasons for it.

For free distribution

145

1(50"000

A

X

Y

B

DE

F

C

8

4

1

26

3

5

7

9

10

N

10. What is the common agricultural land use in the southwestern quarter of the mapped area?

11. Draw the cross section of X-Y line.

Map for the exercise -01

The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka. Do the exercises given based on it.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

146

1(50"000

Map for the exercise -02

The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka. Do the exercises given based on it.

For free distribution

147

1(50"000

3

5

6

4

21

N

Map for the exercise -03

The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka. Do the exercises given based on it.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

148

1(50"000

Map for the exercise -04

The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka. Do the exercises given based on it.

2

N

1

4

5

3E

F

DC

For free distribution

149

1(50"000

Map for the exercise -05

The following is an extract from a 1:50 000 topographic map of Sri Lanka. Do the exercises given based on it.

800 55’200

XY

2

A

6

8

3

5

7

1

4

N

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

150

Bibliography and Sources

²10 - 11 iudc wOHhkh úIhh i|yd is;shï wOHhkh ^1999&" wOHdmk m%ldYk fomd¾;fïka;=j'

²fuá%la is;shï" Y%S ,xld ñkqï fomd¾;fïka;=j'

Glossary

²Topographical map - N+ ,laIK is;shu - ChÂÍUP¨ £h®

²Physical features - fN!;sl ,laIK - ö£ÍvP A®\[PÒ

²Cultural features - ixialD;sl ,laIK - £s£õmk A®\[PÒ

²Relief features - N+ úIu;d ,laIK - uøµz÷uõØÓ A®\[PÒ

²Contour lines - ifudaÉp f¾Ld - \©²¯µU ÷PõkPÒ

²Plain - ;eks;,d - \©öÁÎ

²Spot height - ia:dkSh Wi - Ch E¯µ®

²Undulating lands - /<s ìï - öuõhµø» {»®

²Highlands - Wia ìï - E¯º {»®

²Valley - ksïkh - £ÒÍzuõUS

²Spur - fkrej - _Ák

²Mountain range - l÷jeáh - ©ø»zöuõhº

²Ridge - fy,ajeáh - £õøÓz öuõhº

²Isolated hill - yqol,d lkao - uÛUSßÖ

²Conical hill - fld;a lkao - T®¦U SßÖ

²Escarpment - fudfydr nEjqu - K[PÀ \õ´Ä

²Gentle slope - uo nEjqu - ö©ß \õ´Ä

²Convex slope - W;a;, nEjqu - SÂÄa \õ´Ä

²Concave slope - wj;, nEjqu - SÈÄa \õ´Ä

For free distribution

151

²Gap - lfmd,a, - PnÁõ´

²Cross section - yrialv - £UP¨£õºøÁ

²River system - .x.d uKav,h - BØÖz öuõSv

²Transverse valley - ;S¾hla ksïkh - SÖUS¨ £ÒÍzuõUS

²Longitudinal valley - wdh; ksïkh - ö|kUS¨ £ÒÍzuõUS

²Water divide - Èh fn;au - }º¨¤› {»®

²Meander - .xoÕrh - ª¯õ¢uº ÁøÍÄ

²Marshy land - j.=re ìï - \x¨¦ {»®

²Braided river - yevm¨ .x.dj - ¤ßÛ¯ BÖ

²Distributories - wmYdLd - QøÍ BÖ

²Radial drainage pattern - wÍh c,jyk rgdj - Bøµ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S

²Dendritic drainage pattern - YdÇh c,jyk rgdj - ©µ {Pº ÁiPõÀ £õ[S

²Trellised drainage pattern - cd,dldr c,jyk rgdj - AÎ¯øh¨¦ ÁiPõÀ £õ[S

²Lagoon - l,mqj - PhÜ÷µ›

²Bay - fndlal - Shõ

²Point / Cape - ;=vqj - •øÚ

²Sand bar - je,smrh - ©nØÓøh

²Island - ¥m;a - wÄ

²Coast - fjr< bu - Pøµ÷¯õµ®

²Administrative boundary - mßmd,k udhsï - {ºÁõP GÀø»

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

152

1010Using Graphs to Represent Data

The basic objective of this chapter is to make one understand about the simple line graph, multiple bar graph, and the simple divided circles which are used to represent data.

Like in studying any other subject, in studying geography too statistical tables are used a great deal to collect necessary data and information. The graph can be considered as a medium that is used to understand the information present in statistical tables easily and quickly.

When a statistical table is presented in a graph, it is important to have a good understanding about the nature of the data and the most suitable type of graph necessary to represent it.

Simple Line Graph

Presentation of data in a statistical table by lines is done in a line graph. This line graph is much used to represent the variables that change with time. The temperature, atmospheric pressure, the growth of the population and the state revenue are some examples of the variables that are represented by simple line graphs. Simple line graphs are mostly used because of the ease in drawing them and also because the trends could be instantly understood.

The factors that should be considered when graph is drawn ²Selection of a suitable scale according to the statistical table given. ² Marking time on the horizontal axis and the relevant variables on the vertical axis. ² Setting the vertical scale taking the minimum of the relevant statistical table as zero and the round number next to the highest value of the statistics as the maximum. ²Marking “0” at the foot of the vertical axis and “100” at the top when percentage values are represented. ²Writing a suitable heading according to the statistics in the table.

²Using a suitable color for the line that a single variable is represented.

For free distribution

153

The graph drawn based on the data of the table 10.1 is shown below.

Table 10 .1 Tourists Arrivals 2006- 2011200620072008200920102011559,603494,008438,475447,890654,476855,975

Activities 1. Draw a simple line graph using a suitable statistical table.2. State two factors reflected by the graph.

The basic features of a graph ²Title. ² Scale (Vertical & Horizontal) ²Key ² Frame. ² Source.

Graph 10.1 - Simple Line Graph Source - Annual Report, Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 2012.

Multiple Bar Graphs

Presentation of a statistical table using bars is done by a bar graph. These bars can be drawn either horizontally or vertically. Multiple bar graphs are used when the data of several variables are presented. A multiple bar graph is more suitable for the representation of the data like the annual production of several goods and number of different vehicles registered over several years etc. Ability to identify the numerical value of a variable easily, ability to compare several variables of a year and the ability to study the periodical trends of those variables comparatively are the benefits of this method of graph.

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

154

When multiple bar graphs are drawn, the following factors should be considered.

²Determining the vertical scale according to the maximum and minimum values of the statistical table. ²Marking the time on horizontal axis and the amount on vertical axis. ²Setting starting point of the vertical axis as zero (0). ²Drawing the bars of relevant years joining to each other with equal width. ²Showing by separating the group of bars of a year from the bars of other year. ²Showing the bars of the same variable relating to a particular year by the same color or design. ²Showing used colors or designs by a key.

Table 10.2. - The composition of gross domestic products by sectors.(At current cost-Rs. Billion)

200620072008200920102011Service Industry Agriculture

1705

900

333

2091

1071

418

2525

1295

590

2787

1435

614

3237

1649

718

3795

1957

791

Graph 10.2 - Multiple Bar Graph. Source - Socio Economic Data of Sri Lanka 2012

For free distribution

155

Activities

1. Name the variables represented in the graph.2. What is the development of that variable during 2006- 2011 in rupees billions.

Assignment ²Prepare a multiple bar graph based on a statistical table found in the Central Bank Annual Report or on any other statistical table. ² State the temporal variations of the each of the variable.

Divided Circles

The circle graph that is used to represent the composition of the variables included in a certain statistical table is known as a divided circle graph. In this graph, total value of all the variables is considered 360◦ and according to the value of each variable, 360◦ is divided into sub parts. The divided circle graph is most suitable to represent data like composition of ethnic groups of a country, religious composition, and export and import composition.

The composition of variables as well as their proportion could be understood comparatively in a divided circle graph.

When drawing a divided circle graph the following steps should be considered. ²Drawing a circle using a suitable radius for the graph. ²Deciding the value of angle of the each variable considering the value of the total variables of 360◦. ²Finding the value of each variable according to the percentage value when composition is given in percentage considering 360◦ value of the circle as 100. ²Marking the angular values clockwise according to the size from the base line that is drawn from the centre of the circle until it meets the circumference towards North.

²Placing at the end, If there is a variable marked as "others".

²Completing the drawing of the graph by setting the key with the colors used, to show the composition, scale, heading and the source of data.

According to the graph, the which variable depicts the heighest growth during the period of 2006 - 2011

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

156

Table 10.3. - The Composition of the agricultural export- 2011 (Rs. Millions)

2011Percentage %Value according to 360◦Tea164,86959%2120

Coconut29,39410.5%380

Rubber22,8118.2%300

Other Agricultural crops62,39222.3%800

Agricultural export279,466100%3600

Source- Central Bank Annual Report 2012.

Activities

1. Name the composition of the variables represented in the graph.

2. What is the variable that claims the highest amount of exports?

3. State two uses of this graph.

Assignment

Represent the data taken either from the Annual Central Bank Report or from any other suitable statistical table by using a divided circle graph.Graph 10.3 - Sample Divided Circle graph Source : Socio Economic Data of Sri Lanka - 2012

For free distribution

157

Bibliography and Sources

²Y%S ,xld uy nexl= jd¾;dj ^2012&'

²Y%S ,xld iudc wd¾Ól o;a; -^2012&" uy nexl= jd¾;dj'

Glossary

²Representation of data - o;a; ksrEmKh - uµÄPøÍ ÂÍUSuÀ

²Graphs - m%ia;dr - Áøµ¦PÒ

²Simple Line Graphs - ir, f¾Ld m%ia;drh - \õuõµn ÷Põmk Áøµ¦PÒ

²Multiple Line Graphs - nyq ;Sre m%ia;drh - £À £õº Áøµ¦PÒ

²Simple Divided Circle Graphs - ir, fnÿï jD;a; m%ia;drh - \õuõµn ¤›UP¨£mh Ámh

Áøµ¦PÒ

²Variables - új,Hh - ©õÔPÒ

²Horizontal axis - ;sria wlaIh - Qøh¯a_

²Vertical axis - isria wlaIh - ö\[Szua_

²Minimum - wjuh - CÈÄ¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®

²Zero - Y+kHh - §a]¯¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®

²Maximum - Wmßuh - Ea]¨ ö£Ö©õÚ®

²Percentage - m%;sY;h - \uÃu®

²Gross domestic product - o< foaYSh ksIamdÈ;h - ö©õzu EÒ|õmk EØ£zv

For free distribution

For free distribution

For free distribution

158

²Ethnic composition - jd¾.sl ixhq;sh - CÚŸv¯õÚ EÒÍhUP®

²Religious composition - wd.ñl ixhq;sh - \©¯Ÿv¯õÚ EÒÍhUP®

²Export composition - wmkhk ixhq;sh - HØÖ©v EÒÍhUP®

²Import composition - wdkhk ixhq;sh - CÓUS©v EÒÍhUP®