==== BLOCKS ==== 

112For free distribution

THE RIGHT CAREER

11

Activity 01

Writing

Study the following questionnaire. Write answers to the questions giving details about yourself in your notebook and decide on the type of career that you would like to choose.

Career guidance questionnaire :

1.Which of these areas do you see yourself working in?- Agriculture - Industry- Entertainment - Business- Arts and Crafts - Science and Technology- Education - Environment- Health - Politics- Law - Media - Defence - Travel and Transport- Other

113For free distribution

2 Which of these statements describe you?

- I don’t mind hard physical work - I enjoy working with my hands- I enjoy solving problems - I am a good listener- I am good at figures - I have a good artistic sense- I am a good communicator- I like challenges- I like meeting new people

3.Name your favourite subject/s at school.

4.Do you have any particular interests? If yes, what are they?

5.What do you expect from a job?

- Providing my service to the country - Job satisfaction - Opportunity for promotion - Freedom to make my own decisions- Meeting new people - A good salary- Opportunity to travel - Other

6.Which of these statements are true about you?

- I get on well with other people - I don’t mind taking orders- I need to be my own boss - I get bored if I do the same thing for too long- I can cope when things get tough - I am punctual

114For free distribution

Activity 02

Speaking

Discuss in groups and make a speech on your future career. You may use the following expressions;

I like to……........ because................. I wish…............… I hope to…...........

Activity 03

Reading

Here are some jobs titles and descriptions of those jobs given by people engaged in them. Read the descriptions and match the job title.

JOB TITLEDESCRIPTION

A) Accountant

I need to be my own boss. I will get bored if I have to sit long hours doing the same thing. I like travelling and enjoy being with different types of people.

B) DriverI am self-motivated and I care about people. I am capable of communicating with my customers.

C) Customer Care ExecutiveI am good at figures and working long hours in an office does not bore me. I like to solve problems.

D) Beautician, Hair dressersI think I am a good communicator. I don’t mind sitting for long hours and writing.

E) JournalistI don’t mind hard physical work and enjoy being on the go. I know I have a big responsibility as many lives are in my hands.

F) Tour guideI use my hands with artistic sense. I use my skill and talent to make people look better.

115For free distribution

Activity 04

Writing

Work in small groups.Select a job you like and complete the mind map.Now write a paragraph about that job.

Eg. A teacher works in a school……………………………..

TeacherWorking hoursType of work

DisadvantagesAdvantages

Place of work

Activity 05

Speaking

You see the following advertisement in a Sunday newspaper. You are interested in applying for one of the posts advertised. Work with your partner and pretend to be the receptionist and the applicant. Call the receptionist to make inquiries regarding the job and make an appointment for a walk-in-interview.

116For free distribution

Activity 06

Writing

Write a letter to the Human Resource Manager of Worldwide Shipping (Pvt) Ltd. requesting him to send you an application form to apply for the above job.

117For free distribution

Activity 07

Writing

Imagine they have sent you the following specimen application form. Copy it into your notebook and fill in the relevant details.

Application Form

1. Post

2. Name in full

3. Permanent Address

4. Contact no

5. E-mail

6. Date of birth

7. Age

8. Male/female

7. School/s attended

8 .Educational qualifications

9. Other qualifications

10. Co-curricular activities

11. Experience

12. Referees I II

I certify that the details given above are true and correct.

.................................... ........................................... Date Signature

118For free distribution

Activity 08

Listening

Listen to the telephone conversation and fill in the message form. Then report the message to the class.

Message FormCaller -For whom -Message -

Contact no -

Activity 09

Speaking

This is the dialogue Radha had with Saroj after going to attend a job interview. Role play it with your partner.

Saroj - Good morning Radha! You seem to be in high spirits today.Radha - Good morning! Actually I am. I had a nice experience yesterday. I went to a job interview for the first time.Saroj - Is that so? Even Asitha went to one last week. He had been told about the particular vacancy by his uncle. Tell me how it was.Radha -My father had seen this advertisement in the last week's paper calling for trainee computer operators. After he had discussed it with my mother he asked me to apply.Saroj - Had they asked for any particular qualifications?Radha - Of course. They had invited hardworking and talented young people with basic computer skills to apply. They had not asked for any experience but they had specified a B pass for English at the O/Ls.Saroj - So, what happened at the interview? Were you selected?Radha - I don’t know yet. When I went there, the interview had already started. I was the last to go in. Well, I think I answered all the questions well. I’m hopeful that they will take me best.Saroj - Wish you all the luck, Radha. I hope you’ll get the job.Radha - Thanks, Saroj.

119For free distribution

Learning Point

Past Perfect Tense (passive)

We use past perfect tense to describe actions that had taken place before a particular point of time in the past.

According to the dialogue, before Radha applied for the job, the following actions had taken place.

Last week

The advertisers

requested

the applicants to apply

Father discussed

with mother

Father saw

the advertisement

now

Here is how the Past Perfect is formed:

Subject

had

past paticiple form of the verbThe advertisersrequested

Fatherseen

Hediscussed

a point of time in the past

120For free distribution

Activity 10

Writing

Write the following sentences in Passive Voice.

Eg- His uncle had told him about the particular vacancy. He had been told about the particular vacancy by his uncle.

1. All the members had unanimously selected Inura as the president at the last meeting.2. Somebody had taken my pen while I was away in the playground.3. Mr. Perera had checked the power supply before he started operating the machine.4. Nisali had arranged the classroom before she went home.5. The Principal had read the letter again before it was posted.

Activity 11

Write the following negative sentences and questions in Passive Voice.Eg- 1. They had not asked for any experience. Experience had not been asked for. 2. Had they asked for any particular qualifications? Had any particular qualifications been asked for?

1. The plumber had not repaired the broken tap in the canteen.2. The lawyer had signed the document before he submitted it to the courts.3. Hadn't he paid the telephone bill before the due date?4. Had Thamara sent the invitations for the English day?5. Had Kumaran completed the work before she went to sleep?