==== BLOCKS ==== 

42For free distribution

BEST PRACTICES

05

Role Play

Activity 01

A Day Out

Mrs. Fernando : Come on children, hurry up! We will be late if we don't leave now!Menuka : I'm almost ready. Need to get my hat.Nimali : I'm ready! Mr.Fernando : Let's go! The bus is here.Mrs. Fernando : Children, it's time to go. Bus Conductor : Hurry up, get on. We are already late.( A few hours later at the railway station)Menuka : Look at those trains. I want to have a closer look.Mr.Fernando : Menuka, don't walk on other platforms.Menuka : Why not? I want to.Mrs. Fernando : Because it's dangerous.Mr. Fernando : Sit down and wait for the train.(Announcement: Attention please! This announcement is for all passengers waiting for Podi Menike Express train to Kandy. Please go to platform No.01)Mr. Fernando : Let's go. The train is there.Niamli : I want a seat by the window.Menuka : The train is going, hurrah!Mrs.Fernando : Don't put your head out and watch your hand Menuka.

43For free distribution

Activity 02

Writing

Copy the phrases in bold into your writing book and fill in the table. Follow the example.

ImperativeUttered byUttered toHurry upMrs.FernandoMenuka

Activity 03

In pairs discuss the instructions you have seen displayed in the school, library, bank, etc.

E.g. : Be in the queue.

Activity 04

Read the following instructions on ‘how to write a formal letter’. Write them in your book in the proper order.

A. Use an appropriate salutation to the person you are writing to.B. Write the sender’s address on the top left hand side of the page.C. Sign off your letter with an appropriate closing.D. Place the recipient’s designation and address one line beneath the date.E. Write the body of the letter.F. Write the subject of the letter and underline it.G. Place the date directly below the sender's address.

44For free distribution

Activity 05

Read the following letter of complaint.

F.J. Peiris,Pubudupura,Danpitiya.13.03.2015

The Mayor, Municipal Council,Danpitiya.

Dear Sir,

Complaint against Dumping Garbage in Public Places

I would like to bring to your attention a problem that is faced by the residents of this area. We have noticed that there is a lot of garbage that has been disposed around the tank bund for the past few months.The tank bund has been a place where many children gather in the evening to play and we have worked very hard to keep that area clean. But today, we see that many ice-cream cups, food wrappers, and polythene bags have been carelessly thrown away all over the area. On rainy days, there is a bad odour in and around the area and there is the risk of spread of diseases.Please be kind enough to look into this matter as soon as possible.Thank you.Yours faithfully,FJPerisF.J. Peiris.

Copy : The Medical Health Officer - Danpitiya.

Imagine that you are the Mayor of Danpitiya Municipal Council. Write a reply letter to Mr. Peiris informing him of the immediate steps that would be taken to solve the problem.

45For free distribution

Activity 06

Read the following notice. Construct meaningful questions to which the underlined phrases will be the answers.

NOTICEA Shramadana Campaign will be held on 30th May 2015 from 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. to clean Danpitiya Tank bund and the Children’s Park. Refreshments and a complementary cap will be provided. All are invited.

18.05.2015 Municipal Council Danpitiya.

Activity 07

Design a banner to be put up at the tank bund to inform the public about the Shramadana and the public awareness campaign organized by the Municipal Council in response to Mr. Peiris’s complaint.

46For free distribution

Activity 08

Exclamation Mark ( ! )

Randuli : Good morning!Tashmi : Good morning Randuli ! Did you go to the park after the shramadana?Randuli : No, I didn't have time. Shall we now?Tashmi : O.K. I’d love to.Nethum : Hello! Tashmi : We are going to the park. Would you like to join us? Nethum : No way! I never go there. The garbage pit!Randuli : Not anymore! You didn’t join us in the Shramadana.Nethum : Shramadana! I didn’t know about it. We were not here during the last three weeks.Tashmi : Really? Then join us. Let’s go. ( Children walk to the park)Nethum : Wonderful! I can’t believe my eyes!Randuli : I am happy that we contributed to make the place clean and attractive, too.Tashmi : Look! The garbage bins are kept over there. So it’s easy to maintain the cleanliness.Nethum : Let’s go in. I want to go on a swing.Tashme : Swing! No I can't. I’m afraid of that.

List out the utterances in the above conversation which end with exclamation mark ( ! ). Categorize them under the following topics.

• greetings• expressing surprise• positive feelings• negative feelings

47For free distribution

Learning PointAdverbs

Read the following sentences.

• Polythene bags have been thrown away carelessly.• We have worked very hard.• Place the date directly below the address.

The underlined words in these sentences describe the action. They are called adverbs.

Come here

immediately

quickly

now

You did the work

successfully

well

Activity 09

Change these words into adverbs.

E.g. honest – honestlyhappy -sad -safe -glad -glear -correct -foolish -loud -annual –neat –real-full-

E.g. successful – successfullypainful -wonderful -colourful -skillful -tearful -powerful careful-

48For free distribution

Activity 10

Underline the adverbs in these sentences.

• Open the door very slowly and quietly.• My little brother is splashing water in the pool noisily.• Can you come here quickly?• We sometimes go out for dinner.• They usually lock the door when they go out.

Activity 11

Complete the sentences using the correct form of the word in the brackets correctly.

1.The old lady crossed the road ………….. (careful)2.The man waited for the bus ……………( impatient)3.These sums are not …………. (correct) done.4.We hold the competition ………….. (annual)5.The hall is decorated …………. (colourful)

Read and Enjoy

A day without laughter is a day wasted. -Charlie Chaplin-

Teacher : Sandali, go to the map and find Australia.Sandali : Here it is.Teacher : Very good. Now, class, who discovered Australia?Class : Sandali.

Son : Great news! The teacher said we’d have a test today come rain or shine!Mother : What’s so great about it?Son : It’s snowing.

49For free distribution

Q: What do you call an alligator in a vest? A: An Investigator Q: What happens if you eat yeast and shoe polish? A: Every morning you'll rise and shine!

A woman entered a shop and saw a little dog. He asked the shopkeeper "Does your dog bite?"The shopkeeper said, "No, my dog does not bite."The woman tried to pet the dog and the dog bit her."Ouch!" She exclaimed, “Didn’t you say your dog doesn’t bite?"The shopkeeper replied, "That is not my dog!"

Teacher : How old were you on your last birthday? Student : Nine.Teacher : How old will you be on your next birthday?Student : Eleven.Teacher : That’s not possible. Think again.Student : It’s the truth. I’m ten today.

Activity 12

Group work

Collect jokes like these and prepare a booklet. Share them with your friends.

50For free distribution

Activity 13

Speaking

Ask these riddles from your friends.

1. Why won’t the elephant use the computer?2. Where can you find an ocean without water?3. Why did the computer go to the doctor?4. What is white when it is dirty and black when it is clean? 5. What always falls and never gets hurt?6.What is a robot’s favourite snack?7.What is the longest word in the English language? 8.What letters are not in the alphabet?9. What can't be used until it's broken? 10.What letter of the alphabet has got lots of water?" 11.Why is a river rich?

Match these answers with the riddles.

a. the ones in the mail b. he’s afraid of the mouse c. on a map d. a blackboard e .rainf. it had a virusg. the “C”h. SMILES: there is a mile between the first letter and the lasti. an eggj. because it has two banksk. computer chips