==== BLOCKS ==== 

51For free distribution

INFORMATION

06

Sources of Information

An information source is anything that might inform a person about something or provide knowledge of it. Information can come from different sources such as people, television or radio, newspapers, books, journals and magazines, encyclopedias, and web pages. Different types of questions require different sources of information. The type of information you need will change depending on the question you are trying to answer.

Study the following examples of common sources of information and do the activities that follow.

A. These are collections of articles and pictures about various topics of popular interest and current events. Usually these articles are written by journalists or scholars.

52For free distribution

B. These are collections of articles about current events usually published daily. Since there is at least one in every city, it is a great source of local information.

C. These cover virtually any topic, fact or fiction. This is one of the most common sources of information used by many people.

D. These are collections of short, factual entries. There are two types of these called general and subject. General ones provide overviews on a wide variety of topics while the others contain in-depth entries focusing on one field of study.

E. This allows you to access information on the Internet through a browser. One of the main features of this is speed. This contains information beyond plain text. It includes sounds, images, and video.

F. This is an organized and searchable collection of online records of every item in a library.

53For free distribution

Activity 01

Reading

Study the pictures given above and read the descriptions that accompany them. Next match each description with a sub heading.

Description Sub heading

A Encyclopaedias

B Online Library Catalogues

C Websites

D Newspapers

E Books

F Magazines

Activity 02

Read the descriptions on sources of information and say whether the following statements are true (T) or false (F).

1. A magazine contains articles on different topics. □

2. Browsing the web is slower when compared to

using other sources of information. □

3. An encyclopaedia provides long articles

on a particular topic. □

4 All newspapers are published on a daily basis. □

5. You need the internet facility to access information

on the web. □

6. A library catalogue provides easy access to the

information available in a library. □

54For free distribution

Activity 03

Speaking

Read the contents page of a magazine given below and answer the questions.

1. Which chapter is likely to help you improve your language skills?

2. Which chapter will provide information about computer technology?

3. If you are interested in health matters, which articles would you read?

4. Which chapter do you think would contain the sub topic “punctuality”?

5. Which chapters will help you to relax? Give reasons for your choice.

55For free distribution

Activity 04

Writing

Read the paragraph on ‘newspapers’. Next write a similar paragraph on ‘books’ using the information given.

NEWSPAPERS

Newspapers contain news, information, entertainment and advertising.They are most often published daily or weekly. They give news as to what is happening around the world. Newspapers also express opinion about social and political problems through the editorial. They reflect public opinion as well. They arouse our consciousness on important matters and teach the citizens their rights and responsibilities.

BOOKS

contain information, articles and stories, most often published at any time according to the need.sometimes give information on what is happening around society and reflect opinion of the author.sometimes express opinion about the social and political problems.make us sensitive to certain issues in society.

56For free distribution

Activity 05

Use the information in the grid to write a paragraph about Hiruni’s favourite book. You can begin like this.

Hiruni’s favourite book is ...........................

Name of the bookThe Adventures of Tom Sawyer

AuthorMark Twain

Type of storyChildren's novel

Main charactersTom Sawyer, aunt Polly, Huckleberry Finn

Story in brief

Tom is an energetic young boy whose constant search for fun and adventure leads him towards many dangers, but being brave and courageous he overcomes them and becomes famous.

Why you like itIt is funny, exciting and interesting

Activity 06

Draw a similar grid and complete it with information about the most interesting book you have read. Now write a letter to one of your friends describing it. Include the following in your letter.

● name of the book● the author● characters● story in brief● why you found it interesting

57For free distribution

Activity 07

Listening

Listen to the dialogue and underline the correct answer.

1. Abdul is going to read ……………........… (Oliver Twist/ Huckleberry Finn) 2. Nethmini likes………………................… (adventure stories/ classics)3. Oliver Twist was written by …….....................(Mark Twain / Charles Dickens)4. Abdul………………....................................(bought / borrowed) the book.5 Abdul can keep the book for ....................... (two/ three) weeks.

Activity 08

Reading

A dictionary is a source of information which is useful to you in your studies. The activities given below will help you learn how to use it.

With your teacher’s help refer to the dictionary page given on the next page and answer the questions.

1) List the words to which definitions are given on this dictionary page according to the order they appear. Do you see any significance in the way these words are ordered? Discuss with your partner.

2) Which of the following information about a word does this dictionary page provide? Copy the correct ones into your notebook.

i. The spelling ii. Meaning iii. How to pronounce the word iv The word class to which it belongs v. Example sentences using that word vi. Different forms of the words vii. Plurals of the nouns

3. Get into small groups. Select a word from the dictionary page and find information about that word as required in question two above. Present your findings to the class.

58For free distribution

59For free distribution

Activity 09

Reading and Writing

Read the passage about the Internet and write its positive and the negative effects in the table given at the end.

Internet: a boon or a bane?

With the advent of the Internet, life has been made easier with quick access to information and the number of tasks that can be performed online. But is it only convenient or are there any negative effects associated with its use?

Undoubtedly, the Internet has many positive effects as Internet search engines have advanced to provide quick information retrieval systems providing access to any kind of information for internet users within a very short time.

In addition it has paved the way for some of the most effective means of communication among people, including email chat and Skype. It has also enabled businessmen to do online transactions with their clients and customers without meeting them.

In addition to these, it has also allowed the exchange of ideas and materials among scientists, university professors, and students. It has also provided servers, resource centers and online tools for their research and scholarly activities. Moreover, millions of books, journals and other material have been made available online through the Internet which have enabled people to learn all sorts of new things.

Along with these positive things, the internet can have negative effects, too. One such negative effect is the misinformation that it may provide. Many people trust the Internet for information. Students use it for research to

60For free distribution

help them with their homework while adults use it to find information on things, such as medical or financial advice. The Internet, for all its wondrous abilities, is still unreliable due to bogus sites and misinformation. Addiction to the internet is another negative effect.

Many cases have been reported where the addiction to online social networks such as Facebook, Twitter and online games have affected the studies and day-to-day work especially of students. Moreover, the convenience of the Internet has allowed people to become less active.

As people are able to shop online, and with the amount of time they spent on checking emails and surfing the World Wide Web, they have become less active causing many health problems. Sociologists have also warned about the gradual decrease of interpersonal relationships among family members due to excessive use of the Internet.

Among the negative effects, cyber bullying is another aspect which cause stress and anxiety to many victims. Sometimes people are robbed of their identities and their possessions through the Internet. Theft is easily committed by experienced computer hackers. Therefore the negative effects of the Internet on privacy have become a major threat to its users. Many users of the social networks such as Facebook expose their privacy not knowing of its adverse effects. Sometimes they are exposed to the entire world without their knowledge or consent which can lead to disaster. Many such cases have been reported recently. Therefore, the users of the Internet have to be aware of its proper use in order to minimize its negative effects.

Positive EffectsNegative Effects

61For free distribution

Learning Point

Present Perfect Tense (passive)

The present perfect tense is a grammatical combination of the present tense and the perfect aspect. It is used to express a past event that has results in the present.

In the passage on “Internet: a boon or a bane?” the verbs in bold refer to present perfect tense actions. Although these actions are over, the results are still felt.

Here is how present perfect is formed.

SubjectHas/HavePast participle form of the verb

• It

• Internet search engines

• This action

• Facebook, Twitter and online games

• The internet

• People

has / have

advanced

paved

enabled

allowed

provided

disturbed

allowed

become

Activity 10

Now write the following Present Perfect tense sentences in passive voice.

Eg :-

Online games have affected the studies of students. The studies of students have been affected by online games.

62For free distribution

1. The principal has signed the report cards.2. Somebody has conveyed the message about the Shramadana to the students.3. Doctors have cured many deadly diseases.4. A computer virus has deleted all my essential documents.5. The internet has provided a quick way of communication.

Activity 11

Write the following negative sentences and questions in Passive Voice.

e.g. :Nobody has found a faster way of retrieving information like the internet.

A faster way of retrieving information like the internet has not been found by anybody.

1. We have not taken the dinner yet.2. The students have not swept their classroom today.3 Have you made the reservations for the train seats?4 Have you posted all the invitations for the English Day?5. Ruwan has not coloured the picture he drew for the exhibition yet.

Learning Point

Prepositions (1)

during, beyond, before, after, against, upon

Read the following sentences paying attention to the underlined prepositions.

1) Students can go to the canteen only during the interval.2) There is a large forest beyond those hills.3) I had not known how to operate a computer before I completed the computer course.4) You have a special meeting today after the interval.5) The guest speaker explained how to protect ourselves against dengue.6) The responsibility of preventing dengue is upon all of us.

63For free distribution

Activity 12

Fill in the blanks with the most suitable preposition.

1. Little Mary was so curious about what is there ………………................

( upon, beyond) the horizon.

2. I need to go to the bank ……….....…….. ...(before, during) I join you in

shopping.

3. Many parents take the responsibility of shaping the future of their

children ................................. themselves.( against, upon)

4. Many people do not know how to protect themselves ……………..

(beyond, against) injustice.

5. The poor patient died ………… (during, before) the doctor had arrived.

Activity 13

Fill in the blanks with a suitable preposition from the given list.

during, after, upon, against, before

Kasun wanted to play cricket with his brother......………. coming home from

school, they went to the playground together. Their mother asked them not to get

late …………….. they went out. Once they started playing they forgot about the

time. Mother finished all the house work ………… their absence and waited for

their return. There were dark clouds in the sky and she was worried that it might

rain and make the two brothers wet. Their father laughed saying that children

should learn to protect themselves ………...….. bad weather........................

their return, Kasun and his brother apologized to their mother for being late.