==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

Catholicism

Grade 11

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2015Second Print - 2019Third Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0568-3

Published by : Educational Publications Department

Printed by : Sisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd. No. 110, Pagoda Road, Pitakotte.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka

Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya

Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha

Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Oba we apa vidya

Obamaya apa sathya

Oba we apa shakthi

Apa hada thula bhakthi

Oba apa aloke

Apage anuprane

Oba apa jeevana we

Apa mukthiya oba we

Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha

Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara

Eka mavakage daru kela bevina

Yamu yamu vee nopama

Prema vada sema bheda durerada

Namo, Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

Foreword

With the continuous advancement of the world, the education sector too is

transformed. Therefore, if we require the creation of a student community who

could confront the future challenges successfully, our learning teaching process

must constantly utilize effective approaches. It is our responsibility to disseminate

the knowledge of the new world while assisting to create global citizens with good

values. Our department is actively engaged in producing learning tools with the

great aim of contributing to enlighten the minds of the children of the country.

A textbook is a repository of knowledge. At times, it takes us to a world

of entertainment while developing our critical thinking faculties. It promotes our

hidden potentials. In the coming years, the memories related to these textbooks

will bring you happiness. While making the maximum use of this valuable learning

tool, you must essentially access other useful knowledge spaces too. I wish that you

would gain the ability to enlighten the future as citizens with knowledge and values

by using this textbook.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the panels of writers, editors and

reviewers as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department for the

contribution made on this endeavor.

P.N. Ilapperuma,

Commissioner General of Educational Publications,

Educational Publications Department

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

26.06.2020

v

Monitoring and Supervision

P. N. Ilapperuma- Commissioner General of Educational Publications

Direction

W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination

R.D. Wijewickrama- Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Advisory Board

Rt. Rev. Dr. Maxwell Silva

Very Rev. Fr. Daya Shelton Welikadaarachchi

Panel of Editors

Very Rev. Fr. Piyal Janaka Fernando - National Chatechetical Director, No: 19, Balcombe Place, Colombo 8.

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C. Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya. Panel of Writers

Rev. Sister A.C. Mary Nimalka - Teacher, St. Joseph's Boys' College, Nugegoda.

S.G.K.D.L.C. Prasad - I.S.A., Zonal Education Office, Homagama.

W.K.M.I.S.K. Fernando - I.S.A. (retired)

vi

Marini Dhammika Perera - I. S. A. Divisional Education Office, Colombo North, Maligawatta, Colombo 10.

Tekla Priyani Perera - Teacher, We/ Ne/ Christ Church National School, Tudella, Ja-Ela. Translation

Rev. Sr. Mechtilde Marie - 'Lankarama', No: 19, Balcombe Place Fernando Colombo 8.

Anne Fernando - Co-ordinating Officer, (Catholicism) Lyceum College, Panadura.

Computer Type setting

L.A. Sanduni Nilanka Pathmasiri- Computer UnitAbisheka Ranasinghege Educational Publications Department

Page Layout and Cover Page

L. A. Sanduni Nilanka Pathmasiri - Computer Unit Educational Publications Department

vii

CONTENTS

PageThe Holy Bible1. Pentatuech 12. The Deuterocanonical Books 53. The Prophets of Israel 84. Gospels 13

Faith in the Holy Trinity5. Creation 176. Fall of man into sin 207. Exodus 268. The Covenant of Sinai 329. St. John the Baptist 3710. The Mission of Jesus Christ 4311. Kingdom of God 49

Strength For the life of Faith12. Baptism and Confirmation 5413. The Sacraments of Healing 6014. Holy Orders 6715. Sacrament of Matrimony 7116. Religious Life 7617. Missionary Activity of Laity 80

Living the life of Faith18. Protecting the Environment 8619. Peace 8920. Spiritual and Corporal Works of Mercy 9321. Precepts of the Church 97

Life of Prayer22. The Lord's Prayer 10123. Marian Devotion 10624. Liturgy of Hours (Divine Office) 11325. Meditation 117

viii

1

Teacher - Children, today I have brought you a very valuable book to teach you a very important lesson. But it is a volume, a collection of five books. You find in that book about the creation of the world or the universe, the creation of man and his falling into sin. You find such beautiful stories in parables. It is important for us to understand the message that God is revealing to us through these stories than to find out whether these stories are true or not. Not only that, choosing and appointing patriarchs, Israelites becoming the slaves in Egypt and under the leadership of Moses, Israelites' going back to the promised land.

Marie - We like very much to know about them, teacher.

Teacher - Good. Five of your friends are ready to relate to you about this.

Noel - I am the Book of Genesis. I am the one who recorded about the beginning of the universe and the creation of man. I want to tell you not how the universe was created, but I want to tell you that God is the creator of the universe. My message is for all times.

Rayan - I am the Book Exodus. I speak about the chosen people of God's, the Israelites' freeing from the bondage of slavery in Egypt and journing back to the promised land through the desert. It is a wonderful story. The whole Pentateuch is written on the marvelous experience of mine.

Brian -I am the Book of Leviticus. I speak about the rules and regulations of the liturgy of the Old Testament. Kevin - I am the Book of Numbers. I write about the journey of Israelites in the desert. It was a very difficult journey. It was full of experience of God.

Sherin - They call me the Book of Deuteronomy. I tell them to be faithful to God always and to live according to His word. Those who live accordingly will receive God's blessings.

Teacher - Very Good. With that knowledge let us begin our lesson.

Pentatuech1

2

The first five books of the Holy Bible are Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy. They are known as the “Pentateuch”. In Hebrew, they are known as “Torah” which means “The Law” or “Instructions”. Other names used for the Pentateuch are The Law, and The Law of Moses. Pentateuch is made up of faith of generations of people and their experience of God.

Biblical scholars are of the opinion that four theological traditions have helped in writing the first five books of the Holy Bible, the Pentateuch. The four traditions are Yahwist (J), Elohist (E), Deuteronomist (D) and Priestly (P)

Yahwist Tradition (J)

This tradition uses the name 'Yahweh' for God. The literary style is story telling. It is simple, vivid and dramatic. The following stories belong to this tradition: ² Second creation story (Genesis 2:4b-25)² Adam and Eve (Genesis 3)² Cain and Abel (Genesis 4). In an anthropomorphic way this tradition brings out that God has a very close relationship with man. Eg: God called man and ask where are you (Genesis 3:9). We too must be close to God and experience his love.

Elohist Tradition (E)

God is called 'Elohim.' God is all powerful. He lives far away from man. God reveals to man by means of dreams, visions and angels. E.g. God said to Moses “Come no closer. Remove the sandles from your feet for the place on which you are standing is holy groud.” (Ex. 3:5) The literary style of this tradition is straight, brief and without explanations.

² E.g. Sacrifice of Isaac ( (Genesis 22:1-19)² Jacob’s dream at Bethel (Genesis 28:10-20)God speaks to us in various ways in day today life. We should get tuned to listen to his voice.

Picture 1.1 - Pentateuch

3

Deuteronomist Tradition (D)

The literary style is instructive. This tradition is limited to the Book of Deuteronomy. According to this tradition, one must be faithful to the covenant and should worship one and only one God (Dt. 6:4-6)

Priestly Tradition (P)

According to this tradition God is all powerful. Since its concern is about the priestly teaching, it deals with the religious practices, liturgy and priestly life.² E.g. The first creation story (Genesis 1:1-2:4a)² Covenant with Noah (Genesis 9:1-17)

God created the world in six days and rested on the 7th day. Therefore, sabbath day has to be kept holy. Let us try to keep the Sabbath day which is Sunday for us, holy.

The Importance of Pentateuch

The Pentateuch is full of various theological themes. Accordingly we must worship only one God, the creator and the saviour of the universe. It is the duty of not only of the Israelites but also all human beings. Because of his love and kindness, God chose the nation of Israel for the salvation of the universe. When they became slaves in Egypt God brought them back to the promised land as a fulfillment of his promise to their forefathers. God guides the weak human beings through law and blesses the faithful with his graces. Let us obey the creator God and by fulfilling his commandments, let us become heirs of his blessings and graces.

4

For Life² Let us worship only one God, the creator of the universe. ² Let us love God who loves us.² Let us experience that God is very dear and near to us.² Let us keep Sunday holy.

Activity

1. Name the four theological traditions of the Pentateuch.2. According to the teachings of each tradition write one example that you can follow for your life.3. Write three sentences on the importance of Pentateuch4. Write five benefits that you can gain by studying the Pentateuch.

5

Number of books is the Holy Bible

OldTestamentNewTestamentTotal

Hebrew Bible39-39

Christian Bible392766

Catholic Bible462773

In the Holy Scripture, the list of canonical books means the books, written through the inspiration of God. The problem of the list of canonical books arises with regard to the books in the Old Testament.

Jews and the non-catholic Christians (Protestants) accept only 39 books of the old Testament as canonical books, but the Catholics accept 46 books from the Greek Text, called Septuagint. Jews and Protestants use the Hebrew Text. It is called Masoretic Text and there are 39 books in it. The origin of these two texts are Jewish.

There are 7 extra books in the Catholic Bible. They are called “Deuterocanonical Books.”1. Tobit 2. Judith3. The Wisdom of Soloman4. Sirach (Ecclesiasticus)5. Baruch6. 1 Maccabees7. 2 Maccabees

The Deuterocanonical Books 2

6

“Deutero” means “secondly” Yet Deuterocanonical book were in the Septuagint Text long before the Masoretic Text was finalized. At the beginning there was no difference between canonical and deuterocanonical books.

Septuagint Text

Hebrew Old Testament was translated into Greek in the 3rd century B.C. King Demetrius of Ptolemy II took 6 scribes from each of the twelve tribes. 72 of them translated the Hebrew Bible into Greek. Though the 72 of them did it individually when they got together with the translations they found that all 72 have translated in the same way. It is known as “Septuagint” (meaning: LXX = 70). The 46 books of the Catholic Old Testament are from the Septuagint Text.

Evidence to prove that Deuterocanonical books were written through Divine Inspiration.

1. The New Testament authors often used the Greek Text. Out of 350 quotations from the Old Testament 300 were taken from the Greek Text. Out of 300 quotations 18 were taken from the Deuterocanonical books. If there had been a debate about the canonicity of the deuterocanonical books, they would not have quoted from them.2. In the Greek Text, canonical books and deuterocanonical books are not separated. E.g. after the book of Nehemiah two Deutorocanonical books namely Tobit and Judith and then book of Esther. This shows that they had equal acceptance.3. We have evidence that the early Christian Church has used Deuterocanonical books for their liturgy.

All these show that even before the New Testament time, Deuterocanonical books were considered as the Word of God. There is no doubt that they were written through inspiration of God. We should accept them as word of God and use them for our enlightenment.

7

Activity1. Name the seven Deuterocanonical books.2. Write three reasons why the Septuagint Text is important for us, Catholics.

For your life² Let us accept Deuterocanonical books as the word of God.² Let us use the Deuterocanonical books fruitfully.² Let us make our life meaningful by making use of Deuterocanonical books.

8

First student ¡I am ready to tell you about your future. Everything happens according to your destiny. Nobody can change your destiny. Come, I will tell you about your future.

Second Student¡ I am a person who speaks for God. I have brought you a message from the living God. My purpose is to proclaim divine will.

Third Student¡Is there a difference between the two of them? When you look at them, both of them are alike.

Forth Student ¡ Why not? The first one is a fortune teller. The second one is a prophet.

Fifth Student ¡ Are they not telling the same thing? I cannot see any difference?

Sixth Student ¡ How can it be? One is telling you about your future destiny. The other one is saying about the word of God. The fortune teller speaks about your future destiny. We, Catholics do not listen or believe in fortune telling. There is nothing, called destiny or fate. To believe in destiny is a sin. Everything happens according to the will of God. Our duty is to listen to God’s message, and leave our future in the hand of God.

Prophets of Israel spoke for God and delivered God's message to the people of Israel irrespective of their state, clan, colour or wealth and what will they get in return. The Hebrew word for the prophet was “Nabi” which means “the one who proclaims God’s will to others”. In Greek they were called “prophetes” which means “One who speaks for others”. According to that a prophet is one who speaks on behalf of God.

While prophesing, they used three types of sayings 1. “Thus says the Lord” (Amos 1:3)2. “I, the Lord has spoken” (Ezekiel 5:15) 3. “The word of the Lord came to ........” (Ezekiel 12:1)

The Prophets of Israel3

9

Prophets of Israel can be divided into two.1. Early prophets.2. Classical prophets

Early prophets

There are no books in the name of early prophets, but their teaching and activities are found in the books of Samuel and of Kings. Some of those prophets are,1. Nathan4. Huldah2. Elijah5. Ahijah3. Elishah6. Micaiah

Early prophets have three characteristics 1. Ecstatic experience (1 Samuel 10 :5-15)2. Working in groups (1 Samuel 19:18¡24) 3. They performed miracles to prove their mission (1 Kings 17:16¡24)

Classical Prophets

These prophets have books in their name. They can be devided into 2 groups.

Classical prophets

Major Prophets1. Isaiah2. Jeremiah3. Ezekiel

Minor Prophets1. Hosea2. Joel3. Amos4. Obadiah5. Jonah6. Micah7. Nahum8. Habakkuk9. Zephaniah10. Haggai11. Zechariah12. Malachi

10

The size of their book decides whether one is a major prophet or a minor prophet.

The call of prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 6:1-13)

Prophet Isaiah saw a vision in the Temple. He saw theLord sitting on a high and lofty throne. The angels in their mighty voice praised God saying: Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.” The foundation of the temple shook at their voices and the Temple filled with smoke. Then he said, “Woe is me! I am lost, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I live among a people of unclean lips; yet my eyes have seen the king, the Lord of hosts.

Then one of the seraphs flew to him, holding a burning coal that had been taken from the altar with a pair of

tongs. The seraph touched his mouth with it and said “Behold, this has touched your lips, your guilt is taken away and your sin is blotted out.” Then he heard the voice of the Lord saying, “Whom shall I send and who will go for us? And he said, “Here am I, send me.” And God said “Go and say to this people.” Then prophet Isaiah fulfilled his mission, proclaiming God’s message to the people of Israel. The true God that Isaiah experienced is present in all our churches and the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ is present in every church where the Blessed Sacrament is kept. So it is our duty to behave very respectfully in the church.

Picture 3.1 - prophet Isaiah

The call of prophet Jeremiah (Jeremiah 1:1-19)

Now the word of the Lord came to me saying, “Before I formed you in the womb I knew you and before you were born I consecrated you: I appointed you a prophet to the nations.” Then he said, “Ah Lord God! Truly I do not know how to speak, for I am only a boy.” But the Lord said to him, “Do not say, ‘I am only a boy:’ for you shall go all to whom I send you, and you shall speak whatever I command you. Do not be afraid of them, for I am with you to deliver you.” Then the Lord put forth his handand touched Jeremiah's mouth; and the Lord

Picture 3.2 - Prophet Jeremiha

11

said to him: “Now I have put my words in your mouth. See, today I appoint you over nations and over kingdoms, to pluck up and to pull down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant.” Like prophet Jeremiah, we too must accept our nothingness and weaknesses before God. If God gives us some responsibilities, he will also give us strength and power to do them. Let us have faith in God's mighty power.

The call of prophet Ezekiel ¡ Ezekiel 2:1¡3:5)

God gave his message to prophet Ezekiel symbolically. God said to Ezekiel: “eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel. He ate it and it was sweet as honey in the mouth. God gave him his mission,” I am sending you to the people of Israel to a nation of rebels who have rebeled against me. Ezekiel, who had a deep faith in God and a very strong and firm will, went to the exiled people of Israel in Babylon and was able to enkindle in them some hope of returning to their own land.

All of us who have received the sacrament of Baptism have become prophets. We too must carry the message of God to others and help those who do not listen to the word of God to come back to God.picture 3.3 - Prophet Ezekiel

12

Activity 1. Making use of the letters given below, recognize the early and classical prophets and complete the puzzle.

AS

H

N

J

M

DO

HK

SZNI

E

E

THA

J

N

L

I

C A H

H

R

Z

J

H

N

2. Write five occasions that you got to proclaim the word of God.

For your life ² Let us try to live according to the prophetic call that we received at our baptism.² Let us be messengers of word of God.² Let us always bear witness to truth.² Let us experience God in our weaknesses.

13

4

Gospels

The purpose of writing this gospel was to strengthen the faith of the first Christians who were persecuted in Rome under the Roman Emperor, Niro. St. Mark was one of Peter's followers who helped him as his translator. His main task was to strengthen and give hope to the persecuted Christians, assuring them that only through the cross that they can have victory.

Even today in many countries the Christians are persecuted and even killed for their faith. Let us follow the example of the early Christians during Emperor Niro's time. Let us be brave Christians who stand for our faith.

The Gospel according to St. Matthew

Author : St. Matthew, the apostle

Symbol : Man Because he begins his gospel with the genealogy of Jesus.

Time and place : 80-90 AD Syria Palestine.

The Gospel according to St. Mark

Author :St. John Mark

Symbol : LionIt is because he begins his gospel with the sermon of St. John, the Baptist, crying like a roaring lion in the wilderness. Therefore this gospel gets the figure of a lion as its symbol in the religious tradition.

Time : 64 - 66 AD

Another name : Gospel of Passion

Place :In Rome

14

The Gospel of according to St. Luke

Author St. Luke

Symbol Cow St. Luke begin his Gospel with an incident when a priest, name Zechariah was getting ready to offer sacrifices. Those days bulls were sacrificed.

Time and place : 80-85 AD Antioch in Syria

Other names used for this gospel : gospel of the poor, gospel of gentiles, gospel of mercy, gospel of women.

Purpose of writing the gospel : To prove that Jesus is the saviour not only of the Jews but of the whole human race.

This gentile historian tries to prove that Jesus Christ is the savior of the whole universe. He was a physician and an artist. He was a writer who made a great emphasis on the love and compassion of Jesus towards women, the poor, fisherfolk, the marginalized and widows. Besides the gospel, he wrote the Acts of the Apostles. The Acts of the apostles is considered as the second part of the gospel. St. Luke says in his gospel that Jesus had great sympathy towards the helpless and the despaired. Therefore we too must have sympathy towards the helpless and the needy and help them as much as we can.

Other names, used for this gospel: the Gospel of the kingdom of God and Gospel of the Church.

The purpose of writing the gospel: Jesus is the New Moses and New Messianic Teacher.

The father of Apostle Matthew was Alphaus. Matthew was a tax collector before he was called by Christ. He showed that just as Moses was the law giver in the Old Testament, Jesus Christ was the new law giver in the New Testament. We too must learn the values of the kingdom such as love, justice, peace, forgiveness and try to build up a society where there are such values.

15

Other names used for the gospel : Spiritual Gospel

The purpose of writing gospel : to prove that Jesus is the son of God and by believing in him that you may have Eternal life.

John and his brother, James (the Great) were the first apostles chosen by Jesus. They were fishermen and their parents were Zebedee and Salomi. St. John wrote his gospel in a different style than the others three evangelists. St. John wants to prove that Jesus Christ is the son of God and by believing in him you may have Eternal Life. St. John had tried to prove Jesus' divinity more than others elaborating on his teaching and miracles. We too must try to believe in Jesus and attain Eternal Life.

By living according to the messages found in the four gospels, we can attain Eternal Life. We who study goodnews should be a goodnews to others sothat they too can be happy and attain Eternal Life.

The Gospel according to St. John

Author : St. John, the apostle

Symbol : EagleIt has very deep theological concepts. The eagle is a bird who flies high in the sky.

Time and place : 90-100 AD Ephesus

16

Activity1. Complete this chart

The gospelSymbolTime of writingOther namesPurpose

For your life• Let us witness to Jesus in life challengers•Let us make our life a source of joy to others

17

Rebecca : Mama, in my rose bush a beautiful flower has bloomed.

Mama : See, our whole garden is full of flowers, songs of birds and beautiful butterflies of various colours. What a beautiful day is it?

Rebecca: Brother, how did this beautiful universe came into being? Who made this wonderful systematic order?

Roy : There are various theories about the origin of the universe.

Rebecca: What are they?

Roy : Expansion theory, Big Bang theory and Pierre-Simon Laplace theory.

Naomi : Brother, are these theories true?

Roy : They have not yet been proved scientifically. They may be either true or false.

Naomi : If they are proved to be true, will the creation story be false?

Roy : Not at all

Naomi : Why is it?

Roy : Then they tell us how God created the world. The Holy Bible says that God is the creator of the world, yet it does not say how God created the world. God has given intelligence to man to find out how God created these things. Science helps us to know how of the things.

Creation5

18

Pre History (Genes 1-11)

In the book of Genesis chapters one to eleven are considered as pre history. Pre History means before history. It is difficult to investigate or study things that have taken place before history. The biblical author presents the pre history in parables and fables which speak about the beginning of the universe and man. In doing so he hopes to give only a theological message. He does not expect to teach how the universe and the man came into being. Hence from the pre historic parables and fables we can learn theological messages but not scientific or historical truths. The main message of those stories is that God is the creator of the world.

In the Book of Genesis there are two creation stories.

1. The first creation story (Genesis 1:1 -2:4a)2. The second creation story (Genesis 2:4b-25)

The First Creation Story

This story belongs to Priestly Tradition. In a liturgical setting creation of the world is limited to seven days. Here the author is trying to emphasize the importance of Sabbath day. God created the world in six days and rested on the Sabbath day. In the same way we too must spend the 7th day (Sunday) holy for God. God created man into His image and likeness. God did not create any other creature in His image and likeness. Therefore man is superior to all the other creatures.

Picture 5.1 - The Environment

19

For three reasons man is superior to all other creatures1. Intelligence2. Free well3. Immortal soul

If man is superior to all other creatures he should use his intelligence and free will to do good always. Then he who has an immortal soul can enter into an immortal life.

The Second Creation Story

This story belongs to Yahwistic tradition. Man is the greatest creation on the earth because God has given the breath of life only to man. This shows the close relationship that man has with God.

Woman is created from the rib that the Lord God has taken from the man. By creating woman from the rib, closer to heart shows that the woman and man are equal. She is neither a slave nor a boss. The relationship between man and woman is based on love. Woman is a part of man. Therefore a man is incomplete without a woman and a woman is incomplete without a man. Husband and wife should live their married life with love, respect and understanding. Human beings are the greatest of all God's creations. Therefore man and woman should respect each other's differences.

Activity

1. Write one characteristic that shows man is the supreme creature according to the first creation story.2. Write the three reasons that shows the above characteristic.3. Write one characteristic that shows man is the supreme creature according to the second creation story. 4. Write five things that you can do to safeguard man's dignity.

For your life² Let us acknowledge that God is the creator of the world.² We are made to the likeness of God. So let us live to protect that nobility. ² Let us respect the sex differences and live in cooperation.

20

6

Fall of man into sin

Look at the various kinds of food in this picture. Try to recognize them, cake, ice-cream, chocolate and various kinds of meat. How tasty and nutritious are they? but cake, ice-cream and other sweet things are not good for a diabetic patient. Likewise beaf, pork and sausages are bad for heart patients. If they eat these food they become more sick and they may die soon.

We and those sick people have an appetite to eat them. It is alright to have an appetite. An appetite is neither good nor bad. It is the decision, based on appetite that becomes good or bad.

The serpent in the Book of Genesis chapter three is a symbol of man's appetite and it shows how the serpant increases the appetite (Genesis 3:1-6).

Serpent ¡ Did God say, you shall not eat of any tree of the garden?

Woman ¡We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden but God said you shall not eat of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.

Serpent ¡You will not die. For God knows that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.

Picture 6.1 - sweets and meat

21

When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and it was a delight to the eyes and that the tree was to be desired to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate and she also gave some to her husband, and he ate.(Genesis 3:6)

The above scripture quotation shows how appetite speaks to her: The tree was good (Genesis 3:6)The fruit was a delight (Genesis 3:6)The fruit makes one wise (Genesis 3:6)

Before she ate the fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, she had already forecast that fruit was delicious and that it was a means of wisdom. She made a wrong decision based on appetite. We can have a number of messages from this. ³ We should not make wrong decisions, based on appetite.³ When we make decisions we must listen to our conscience.³ We have to listen to God's will in our free choice.

God is a loving father. Therefore God advises His children sothat they may walk on the right path. The advice given to Adam and Eve is such an example.

But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall die. (Genesis 2:17)

Another example is the advice, given to Cain.

The Lord said to Cain; Why are you angry, why has your countenance fallen? If you do well, will you not be accepted? And if you do not do well, sin is couching at the door; its desire is for you, but you must master it. (Genesis 4:6-7)

22

Adam and Eve gave into their appetite and ate the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Cain, full of jealousy and envy towards his brother Abel, killed him. God questioned Adam, Eve and Cain who had gone against his advice and sinned against him.

Adam and Eve (Genesis 3:11-19)Cain (Genesis 4:9)

² Questioning AdamWho told you that you were naked?Have you eaten of the tree of which I commanded you not to eat?Adam : The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate.² Questioning WomanWhat is this that you have done?Woman: The serpent beguilled me and I ate.

² Questioning CainWhere is your Abel?Cain: I do not know, am I my brother's keeper?

God punished the man who has gone astray.

² I will greatly multiply your pain in childbearing; ² In pain you shall bring forth children.² Yet your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.

ToEveGenesis3:16

² Cursed is the ground. In toil you shall eat of it all the days of your life² Thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you,² In sweat of your face, you shall eat bread till you return to the ground, for out of it you were take² you are dust, and to dust you shall return.

To AdamGenesis3:17-19

23

ToCain

² you are cursed from the ground .² You shall be banned from the soil² when you till the ground, it shall no longer yield to you its strength ² you shall be a wanderer on the earth

Genesis4(11:12)

God did not punish our firstparents with anger but with love. as parents who punish their children when they do wrong. Though the parents punish us they love us; and forgive us. God's love and mercy towards us are shown through the promises, laid down below.

I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; and he will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel.(Genesis 3:15)

Through this promise God, gave a hope to Adam and Eve about salvation. God promises them to send a Saviour.

The Lord God made for Adam and for his wife garments of skins and clothed them.

(Genesis 3:21)

They were wearing fig leaves; God made them garments out of skins. This shows God's merey and love for them. Even for those who have sinned against God, his protection and attention is always there. God had mercy on Cain too.

24

Then the Lord said to Cain, Not so! If any slays Cain, vengence shall be taken on him sevenfold.(Genesis 4:15)

We must obey and respet all those who give us good advice and show us the correct path. This remind us that even a life of a sinner is belong to God. We have to obey;³ our conscience ³ our parents and elders ³ our teachers and³ our religious leaders

Noah

From the time of our first parents the sin in the world increased. The Lord saw thatthe wickedness of man had increased to its zenith. The author of the Bible says:

The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. And the Lord was sorry that he had made man on the earth, and he grieved him to his heart. So the Lord said, “I will blot out man whom I have created from the face of the ground, man and beast and creaping things and birds of the air. I will bring a flood of waters.(Genesis 6:5-7, 6:17)

Sin increased on the earth. Hence God decided to blot out human beings from this earth. The author of the Bible wants to say not that God wanted to destroy mankind by a flood but to remove sin from this earth. He brought about a flood and thereby to have a beginning of a new earth. Noah is the beginner of the new creation. He was chosen because;

1. Noah was a righteous man (Genesis 6:9)2. Blameless in his generation 3. Noah walked with God.}

25

Noah's righteousness spared his family from a great disaster and your righteousness counts for the salvation of² yourself² your family² your country

Activity1. Write five guidelines that you can give to one of your friends who has fallen into sin by giving into his appetites.2. Now you have reached to your adolescence. There are cetain things that you would desire. Write the good and bad effects they will bring about.

Desiregoodbad12345

ComputerInternetMobile phoneFacebookFashions

3. Write five qualities that you like to inculcate in your life sothat you may be a righteous person like Noah.

4. Write five instances to show that sin is increasing and write five suggestions to eradicate them.

For your life² Let us not give into appetites.² Let us listen to our conscience.² Let us accept the advice of the elders. ² Let us lead a righeous life like Noah.

26

7

When God called Abraham, He gave him a promise: “I will make of you a great nation” (Genesis 12:2). He fulfilled that promise and let his family grew into a great nation. That great nation was in Egypt.

Joseph was already in Egypt. Then Joseph died, and all his brothers and all that generation. But the descendants of Israel were fruitful and increased greatly; they multiplied and grew exceedingly strong, so that the land was filled with them.(Exodus 1:5-6)

Abraham's generation grew and multiplied in Egypt with the assistance of the Egyptian kings, but later, the situation changed:

There arose a new king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph(Exodus 1:8)

Exodus

Abraham

Isaac

Jacob

Reuben

SimeonLeviJudah

IssacharZebulun

Joseph

Benjamin

Dan

NaphtaliGadAsher

27

The king who did not know anything about Joseph meant that he did not know any thing about the great services that Josehp had rendered to Egypt. Therefore the new king of Egypt wanted to control the increase of the Israelites. For that he followed three steps:

1. Forced labourHe set taskmasters over them to oppress them with forced labour. They built store cities, Pithom and Rameses. They made their lives bitter with hard service in mortar and brick, and all kinds of work in the field labour (Exodus 1:11-14).2. Killing of male children at birthThe king ordered the midwives to kill male children at birth (Exodus 1:16)3. Every boy that is born to the Hebrews shall be thrown into the River Nile (Exodus 1:22).

When she (mother of Moses) saw that he was a goodly child she hid him three months. And when she could hide him no longer she took for him a basket made of bulrushes and daubed it with bitumen and pitch; and she put the child in it and placed it among the reeds at the river's bank. Then the king's daughter came to bathe in the river. She saw the basket among the reeds and asked a maid to bring it. When she opened it she saw the child, and she took pity on him. She took him as her son. She named him Moses.(Exodus 2:1-10)

God who paved the way for Moses to go to the king's palace helped him to grow up like a prince with all the royal comforts. He learnt all the skills and received a training to be a good leader. God, who prepared him, appeared to Moses in the burning brush and revealed himself.

God said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.”(Exodus 3:6)

28

Picture 7.1 - God calls Moses

God called Moses to free the Israelites from the bondage of slavery and lead them to the promised land.

I have come down to deliver them out of that land and to bring them into a land flowing with milk and honey.(Exodus 3:8)

Moses accepted God's invitation though it was full of obstacles and struggles. He went to king Pharaoh, and told him that God wants him to free the Israelites from the slavery of Egypt. King Pharaoh ignored his request. Moses was not discouraged he always remembered the encouraging words of God:

I will be with you.(Exodus 3:12)

29

Pharaoh's heart was hardened and he would not listened to Moses and he would not accept God's almighty power. Therefore God sent ten plagues to the people of Egypt.

Ten Plagues

1Water turned to bloodFrogs

Gnats

Flies

Death of livestock

Boils

Hail

Locusts

Darkness

Death of the firstborn

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Gradually the plagues increased until the death of the firstborn. The reason for this is in the quotation below.

The Lord said to Moses, “Pharaoh will not listen to you, in order that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt”. (Exodus 11:9)

30

After the death of the firstborn of Egypt, king Pharaoh gave permission to the Israelites to leave Egypt. When king Pharaoh was told that the Israelites have left Egypt, he and his official said “What is this we have done, that we have let Israel gofrom serving us?” Egyptians persued the Isralites and got drowned in the sea. God isthe master and the creator of the whole universe. Good God makes use of the nature to show his love and protection to His people.

The Israelites experiencedGod's love and protection in their journey in the desert

Crossingthe Sea

Receiving drinking water at Marah

Receiving manna for their food

Receiving flesh of quails for food

Receiving drinking water at Massah and Meribah

Guidance through pillars of fire and cloud

God chose Moses to free the Israelites from the bondage of Egypt and bring them back to the promised land. In the same way, through the sacrament of baptism, God has entrusted to the church to save the children of God from all kinds of slavery, and to take them to the heavenly promised land, kingdom of God.

We have received the Baptism and have become the children of God. Therefore we have the responsibility of helping others to free themselves from the bondage of sin and pave the way for them to go to the promised land which is the kingdom of heaven.

In our journey of life, God who gave divine protection to the Israelites in the wilderness, will protect us too in our difficulties and struggles. We should have a

31

deep faith in God through out our life. St. James in his letter says about actionsof faith.

What does it profit, my brethren, if a man says he has faith, but has not have works? Can faith save him? So faith by itself, if it has no works, is dead.

(James 2:14-17)

Activity

1. Write five fetters of slavery of youth and write five ways and means to get rid of them.2. Write five challenges that Moses had to face in answering God's call3. Explain with three examples what you can do to make your faith, a faith of action.

For your life

The way to heaven is narrow, thorny and difficultyou have to work hard to get into heaventhe way to destruction is easy and widethere are those who go there too

Rev. Fr. Don Peter's 70th song in catholic Subhasitaya

32

8

The Covenant of Sinai

A covenant is a solemn agreement between two parties over something with conditions laid down. There are various kinds of agreements, namely poltical agreements, economic agreements peace agreements, marriage agreements, etc.

There are covenants in the Holy Bible. They are different from the agreements in the society. Here are some differences.³ It is God who initiates the covenant.³ There is a vast difference between God and man.³ Though God is always faithful to all those agreements, man breaks them.

Here are some examples for such covenants.

(1) God made a covenant with our first parents

I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed. He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.(Genesis 3:15)

Picture 8.1 - Moses with the Ten commandments

33

God had to make a covenat with our first parents because they went against his words and lost the relationship that they had with God. To reestablish that relationship God promised to send a redeemer. The promise that God made to our first parents was fulfilled in Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ crushed the head of the serpent.

(2) The covenant that God made with Noah

After the sin of disobedience of our first parents, sin increased in the world. Therefore God wanted to eliminate all the sins from this world. Therefore God sent a great flood and all the sinful people got drowned. Afterwards God made a covenant with Noah that he will not destroy the earth with a flood.

I establish my covenant with you, and your descendants after you and with every living creature ............ that never again shall all flesh be cut off by the waters of a flood, and never again shall there be a flood to destroy the earth.(Genesis 9:11)

The rainbow is the external sign of this covenant.

I have set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth.(Genesis 9:13)

(3) The covenant made with Abraham

God made a covenant with Abraham too. That covenant is from two traditions.

34

Genesis 15:1-24 (J Tradition)Genesis 17:1-14 (P Tradition)

1. “He brought him outside and said 'Look toward heaven and number the stars, if you are able to number them so shall your descendants be” (Genesis 15:5)2. To your descendants I give this land (Genesis 15:18)

1. “I will make you exceedingly fruitful; and I will make nations of you, and kings shall come forth from you”. (Genesis 17:6)2. “I will give to you and your descendents after you, the land of your sojourning and a the land of canaan, for an everlasting possession. And I will be their God”. (Genesis 17:8)

There are two main points in this covenant 1. A great generation out of Abraham2. A land that will be his foreverThe visible sign of the covenant with Abraham was circumcision

This is my covenant, which you shall keep. Every male among you shall be circumcised. (Genesis 17:10)

By fulfilling this external sign, the Israelites entered into a covenant relationship with God.

^4) Sinai Covenant

The Israelites, who led a nomadic life became the people of God after the Sinai covenant. God gave them the Ten commandments as a set of rules to be kept. Ten commandments are a sign of God's love. The ten commandments are a guide for us. It shows how to have our relationship with God and our neighbour. This covenant brings us closer to God and our neighbour.

35

Exodus 20:1-17

Our duties towards God

1. I am the Lord your God. You shall have no other gods before me.2. You shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain.3. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy.

Our duties towards our neighbour

4. Honour your father and your mother5. You shall not murder6. You shall not commit adultery7. You shall not steal8. You shall not bear false witness against your neighbour9. You shall not covet your neighbour's wife10.You shall not covet your neighbour's goods.

Ten commandments are a set of rules for all times. All generations have followed these rules and have built up a good relationship with God. We too must live according to the ten commandment and become worthy people to enter into heaven.

As the Israelites became people of God through the Sinai covenant, we too have become children of God through the sacrament of Baptism. We too have made a covenant with God through Baptism.

36

To believe in God

To reject satan and all his actions

Let us keep these promises and protect our divine sonship

Baptismalpromises

God is faithful to his promises. We too must keep our promises and be faithful to them. We must fulfill the promises that we have made to our neighbours. By doing so we glorify God.

Activity

1. Complete the following chart

NoCovenantReason for the covenantpromise of thecovenant1234

2. “Ten Commandments are for all times.” Explain this in 75 words. 3. Write five ways of fulfilling your Baptismal promises.

For your life² Let us live according to the Baptismal promises.² Let us obey the ten commandments.² Let us lead a well disciplined life.² Let us fulfil; our promises.

37

9

St. John the Baptist

Old Testament

New Testament

Behold, I send my messager to prepare the way before me. (Malachi 3:1)

He will turn many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God. (Luke 1:16)

As it is mentioned in the Old Testament, St. John the Baptist's responsibility was to go before the Lord Jesus Christ and prepare the way for Him and the people to accept His message. The birth of John the Baptist was informed to his father Zechariah by an angel.

According to the custom of the priesthood, it fell on to him by lot to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense. And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of altar of incense. And Zechariah was troubled when he saw him and fear fell upon him. But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer is heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son”. (Luke 1:9-13)

Picture 9.1 - St. John the Baptist

Zechariah, who could not believe this divine message, questioned the Angel:

38

For he will be great before the Lord and he shall drink no wine or strong drink and he will be filled with the Holy spirit even from his mother's womb. (Luke 1:15)

Mary, who was filled with fraternal love, went to visit her cousin Elizabeth and greeted her.

When Elizabeth heard greeting of Mary the babe leaped in her womb. (Luke 1:41)

How shall I know this? For I am an old man and my wife is advanced in years (Luke 1:18)

Since Zechariah did not believe God's message, he had to undergo a punishment.

And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak untill the day that these things come to pass, because you did not believe my words. (Luke 1:20)

The child who was to be born of Zechariah and Elizabeth was none other than John the Baptist who was to prepare the way to Jesus Christ. Thus it is clear that nothing is impossible for God. It is also proved by the words that the Angel Gabriel told Mother Mary:

And behold, your kinswoman Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. For with God nothing will be impossible. (Luke 1:36)

When the angel informed Zechariah about the birth of John the Baptist, the angel told him some important things about him.

39

It is the teaching of the Church that at this moment St. John the Baptist was freed from the original sin.

According to the Jewish customs, the child was circumcised on the eighth day after his birth. As they were preparing to give him a name, Zechariah gave his name:

He asked for a writing tablet and wrote, “His name is John.” And they all marvelled. And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, blessing God.(Luke 1:63)

By a special kind of birth John the Baptist received a special calling by God. His mission was to prepare the way for the Messiah, the one who was to come. He began his mission around River Jordan.

He went in to all the region about the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. (Luke 3:3)

Starting his ministry, he challenged the people of Israel.

You brood of vipers. Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruits that befit repentance, and do not begin to say to yourselves. ''We have Abraham as our father for I tell you: God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.'' (Luke 3:7-8)

40

Then Now

To the ordinary peopleLuke 3:11

ToSoldiersLuke 3:14

³ He who has two coats, let him share with him who has none.³ He who has food, let him do likewise.

³ Rob no one by violence or by false accusations. ³ Be content with your wages.

³ We are invited to do our job in accordance with the salary we get, and work for the betterment of the country with love and justice.

³ We are invited to share with others even things necessary for us.

To Tax collectors Luke 3:13

³ Collect no more than is appointed you.³ We are invited to do our work with fairness and justice.³ To do our duties well for the welfare of the citizens of our country.

By this saying it shows that one cannot gain salvation only by belonging to Abraham's generation. Repentance is necessary and true personal conversion is very necessary. In the same way only by receiving baptism one cannot attain salvation. We have to have repentance for our sins, real conversion of heart and lead a good and holy life.

The response of the people who listened to John the Baptist was, “what then shall we do?” (Luke 3.10). John the Baptist gave advice to ordinary people, tax collectors and soldiers who came to him. The advice that he gave is fitting not only for present but also future generations. By his advice he expected a change of attitudes. It is an invitation for us to have a change of our lifestyles.

41

The new social doctrine that St. John the Baptist laid down included good virtues such as justice, communion, solidarity and love.

Just as St. John the Baptist prepared the way for the first coming of Jesus Christ, the Holy Catholic Church and each and everyone of us have the responsibility of preparing the people for his second coming.

Holy Mother Church in her liturgical year has set aside two seasons, namely Advent and Lent as periods of repentance. Not only during these two periods but also everyday and every moment we should prepare ourselves for the second coming of Jesus Christ.

Death of St. John the Baptist (Matthew 14:1-12)

When Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced before the company and pleased Herod so that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask. Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter. And the king was sorry but because of his oath and his guests, he commanded it to be given; he sent and had John beheaded in the prison.”(Matthew 14:6-10)

The main reason for his death was that John the Baptist spoke boldly about Herod's wrong behavior. Herod kept his brother's wife as his own.

For Herod has seized John and bound him and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, because John said to him. “it is not lawful for you to have her.” And though he wanted to put him to death, he feared the people, because they held him to be a prophet. (Matthew 14:3-4)

42

Activity

1. Explain three things that you can do to fulfill the message that John the Baptist gave to the ordinary people.2. Give an example when you testified to your prophetic mission.

For your lifeLet us live a righteous life

Since John the Baptist spoke bravely about injustice and lawlessness, he was put to death.

In his prophetic mission he spoke bravely about injustice in the society and he had to pay for it with his life. In the same way all those who speak against injustice will have to face the same fate. E.g.Rev. Fr. Michael Rodrigo.

You who have received the sacrament of Baptism is a prophet or a prophetess. Are you ready to stand up for justice and truth? When you try to stand today for those things you might have to lose many things. Even if you have lost many things you cannot by pass them. That is the duty of a Catholic today.

43

10

The Mission of Jesus Christ

Now when all the people were baptized, and when Jesus also had been baptized and was praying, the heaven was opened and the Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form as a dove and a voice came from heaven, “Thou art my beloved son; with thee I am well pleased.” (Luke 3:21-22)

After this experience at the River Jordan, Lord Jesus Christ went into the wilderness to have a deep union with His Father:

Jesus' public life and his ministry started with his baptism. When he was being baptized by John the Baptist, the Holy Trinity manifested. Jesus was proclaimed as the Son of God.

Jesus full of the Holy Spirit returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit for forty days in the wilderness, tempted by the devil. And he ate nothing in those days; and when they were ended, he was hungry.(Luke 4:1-2)

Picture 10.1 - Baptism of Jesus

44

Incarnated Jesus had to face three temptations at the beginning of his ministry.

The temptationThe response of JesusIts message

1st

temptationLuke 4:3-4

The devil said to him, “if you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread”

“Man shall not live by bread alone”One should use one's own power and capabilities for the common good and should not use them for one's selfish gains.The life nourished by the word of God is much more valuable than the life nourished by food.

2nd

temptationLuke 4:7-8

Then the devil took him to a mountain showed him the kingdoms of the earth and said, “If you, then, worship me (satan), it shall all be yours”

You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.

What belongs to God should not be given to power and wealth.

3rd

temptationLuke 4:9-12

Then the devil took him to Jeruselem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, “if you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here for it is written. He will command his angels to protect you.”

It is said You shall not tempt the Lord your God.

We must not work for our personal glory.

Having overcome these three temptations, he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up He went to the synagogue on Sabbath day, as his custom was. And he stood up to read, and there was given to him the book of the prophet Isaiah.

45

Miracles

According to St. Augustine, a miracle is an act contrary to the laws of nature. For example, in the nature water never turns into wine, but Jesus turned water into wine. By performing miracles, Jesus proved that the kingdom of God had come, We can categorise the miracles of Jesus Christ into four groups.

1 HealingsThe man with a withered hand (Matthew 12:9-14)2 ExorcismsThe healing of Gerasene Demonic (Mark 5:1-20)3 Nature MiraclesWalking on the sea (Matthew 14:22-31)4 Raising the Dead Raising of Lazarus (John 11:38-44)

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and recoverying of sight to the blind to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord. (Luke 4:18-19)

As it is mentioned in the above scripture passage, the aim of the mission of Jesus was the welfare of the poor, the slaves, the oppressed and the blind.

46

But if it is by the finger of God that I cast out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you. (Luke 11:20)

Deep faith in the power God is a necessity for performing miracles.1. Jesus said to the blind man at Jericho “Receive your sight. Your faith has made you well” (Luke 18:42).2. To the woman who touched the fringe of his cloak. “Take heart, daughter; your faith has made you well.” (Matthew 9:22).

They show the abounding love of God for manGod reveals himself to manThe glory and power of God are revealedThey prove that Jesus is the son of GodThey testify to the ministry of Jesus ChristThey are signs of messianic kingdom

Through the miracles of Jesus Christ

Jesus, who proved that the kingdom of God has come through miracles, bore witness through his words too. It is clear from the following passage of scripture.

Picture 10.2 - Examples of four categories of miracles performed by Lord Jesus

47

You can experience miracles if you have a deep faith in God, when you face problems, challenges, sicknesses and pain in your life. To the extent your experience you faith deepens.

Mission of the seventy (Luke 10:1-12)

Only St. Luke mentions the mission of the 70. Bible scholars say that it was the belief that there were seventy nations at that time in the world. St. Luke says that the Lord appointed another seventy to send them ahead of him; Jesus wants every nation to hear the message of the goodnews. The mission of the seventy is symbolic. That the goodnews have to be preached to all those who do not know the goodnews.

Jesus chose a group to establish his kingdom in the hearts of people. He explained to this group of disciples the urgency of this apostolate and the trials and challenges they have to face in performing this service. He advised them to carry no bag, no purse, no sandals and to have faith in divine providence.

The harvest is plentiful but the labourers are few; pray therefore the Lord of the harvest to send out labourers into his harvest. Go your way behold, I send you out as lambs in the midst of wolves. Carry no purse, no bag, no sandals; and salute no one on the road. Whatever house you enter, first say “Peace be to this house;” and say to them the kingdom of God has come to this house.” (Luke 10:1-9)

Holy Mother Church has the responsibility of evangelization of the world till the end of time. We, who have become the children of holy Mother Church through baptism, have the same responsibility of spreading the goodnews wherever we are. First we must establish the Christian values within ourslaves and then give them to the society where we live in.

Through evangelization and catechism we can bring the goodnews to the world. By leading exemplary lives we can preach the goodnews to others. The best place for this is the lay apostolates in our own parish.

48

Let us join these various societies in the parish and take the mission of Jesus forward.

Activity

1. Write an incident that you experienced Jesus in your life of faith.2. Write five ways that you can fulfil your responsibility of preaching the goodnews to others as a Catholic student.3. Write three things that you have to do to experience miracles in your life.4. Write a miracle that you experienced in your life recently.

For your life

³ Let us experience the living Lord in our life of faith³ Our responsibility is to do missionary work like Jesus. Let us be charitable towards the poor and the weak.

49

Kingdom of God

A kingdom has its limits. It has rules and a constitution. It has people, governed by a government. Kingdom of God is not a worldly kingdom. It has no limits. Then where is the kingdom of God?Is it above the sky?Is it down on the earth?Is it within you?Is it within me?Or has it not yet come?

The Kingdom of God is

Kingdom of God is surrendering oneself to the will of God and being fully under his control.

Picture 11.1 - Where there is love, there is God

To live in heaven is “to be with Christ.” The elect live “in Christ,” but they retain, or rather find, their true identity, their own name. According to St. Ambrose, for life is to be with Christ, where Christ is, there is life, there is the kingdom.(C.C.C. 1025)

11

50

Lord Jesus Christ taught the values of the kingdom through parables.

Examples: - • Parable of the Sower (Matthew 13:1-23)• Parable of the weeds among the wheat (Matthew 13:24-30)• Parable of the Mustard Seed (Matthew 13:31-43)• Parables of Treasure, Yeast, Pearl and Net thrown into the sea (Matthew 13: 44-53)Parable of the sower

Kind of the ground, where seeds fellWhat happened to the seedsExplanation of the parable

Seeds fell on the path Birds came and ate The evil one comes and snatched what is sown in the heartSeeds fell on the rocky ground where there was no soil

They sprang up quickly. Since there were not enough soil and they had no roots, they withered away.

He who hears the word and accepts it with joy, endures it only for a while and when troubles come on account of the word he immediately falls away.Seeds fell among thornsWhat fell among the thorns grew up and thorns choked them

One hears the word, but the cares of the world and delight of riches choke the word and it yields nothingSeeds fell on good soilThey brought forth grains some a hundred fold some sixty and some thirty

This is the one who hears the word and understands it bears fruit and yields hundred fold in another sixty and in another thirty

Picture 11.2 - Parable of the sower

51

Lord Jesus Christ through Sermons taught the people about the Kingdom of God.

Being asked by the pharisees when the kingdom of God was coming, he answered them, The kingdom of God is not coming with signs to be observed; nor will they say “Look here it is! or There! For behold the kingdom of God is in the midst you”

(Luke 17:20-25)

Therefore, we need not run here and there looking for the kingdom of God. Kingdom of God is within us. It is among us. We desire to find the kingdom of God wherever we are. To fulfill that desire we must read the sermon on the mount and try to understand its teachings and live according to those teachings of Jesus.

The kingdom values according to the sermon on the mount.

We find the sermon on the mount in Matthew chapters 5, 6, and 7.Here are the some of the teachings • The beatitudes (Matthew 5:1-12)• Salt and Light (Matthew 5:13-16)• Teaching about Retaliation (Matthew 5:38-42)• Love for Enemies (Matthew 5:43-48)• Teaching abouth Almsgiving (Matthew 6:1-4)• Teaching about Fasting (Matthew 6:16-18)• Treasure in Heaven (Matthew 6:19-21)• Dependence on God (Matthew 6:25-34)• The Golden Rule (Matthew 7:12)• The Narrow Gate (Matthew 7:13-14)• The True Disciple (Matthew 7:21-23) • The Two Foundations (Matthew 7:24-29)

Picture 11.3 - The Sermon on the Mount

52

Values of the kingdom according to beatitudes

1. Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven

2. Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted

3. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth

4. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled

5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

6. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

7. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called children of God

8. Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness, sake for theirs is the kingdom of heaven

Lord Jesus Christ by preaching the eight beatitudes in the Sermon on the Mount teaches us the kingdom values. To build up God's kingdom within us and among us let us make use of the eight beatitudes and build up a society of peace, joy and love.

Through the value system of Sri Lankan society let us build up the kingdom values.

Lord Jesus invites us to develop kingdom values in the society where we live. These are some of the good values:

53

• Greeting “God Bless You” with proper gesture•Make the sign of the cross or say a little prayer before going out of the house or before beginning an important work.• Bowing parents and Teachers. • Not listening to private conversations of other people• Stand up when an elder comes.• Not siting above elders.• Asking pardon, when made a mistake.

There are some more good values that we practise in our day to day lives. We must try to lead others towards these good values so that we can guide them to God. God is inviting all of us to inherit his kingdom.

Activity1. Complete this chart

parableParable in shortMessage giveni. Parable of the weeds among the wheatii. Parable of the mustard seed

iii. Parable of Yeast

iv. Parable of the Treasure

v. Parable of the Pearl

vi. Parable of the Net

2. Complete this making use of the sermon on the mount

LessonIts message

1. Teaching on Retalitions

2. Teaching on Almsgiving

3. Teaching on Fasting

................................................................................................................................................

For your life

Let us live christian values.

54

12

Baptism and Confirmation

The words that Jesus said to Nicodemus verifies that we should receive baptism to enter the kingdom of God.

Unless one is born of water and the spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God.

(John 3:5)

Before ascension Jesus commanded his apostles to make disciples from all nations and baptize them.

Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you, and behold I am with you always to the end of the age.

(Matthew 28:19-20)

Picture 12.1 - Baptism of Jesus and Baptism of an infant

Baptism

55

Forgiveness of original sin and personal sins and punishment for sins

Becomes a child of God

Holy Trinity comes and lives within the person

Seals with indelible spiritual mark

Becomes the heirs of the kingdom of God

Eligibility to receive other sacraments

Participates in the priestly, kingly and prophetic functions

Becomes a member of the mystical body of Christ

Becomes the member of the Holy Church

Divine

graces

of

Baptism

Through Baptism you have become the temple of the Holy Spirit. By doing a mortal sin, do not dispel the supreme being from your soul. (Pope St. Leo the Great)

The Qualifications needed to be a god parent

³ Should have received the sacraments of initiation (Baptism, Confirmation and Holy Communion)³ Should have completed the age of 16³ Should live a life of faith and understand the duties, assigned to the role³ Should be free from any kind of punishment, declared by the Catholic Church³ Should be a person appointed by the child's parents³ One should have the ability and the will to perform his duties³ Should not be child's parents.

56

Symbolic things used at the Baptism and their meanings

Water : Water is the main and essential symbolic thing at the Baptism. As water was used at creation of the world, it gives a new life at Baptism. In the begining of the world, the Spirit of God was moving over the waters (Genesis 1:2). Holy spirit descended upon Jesus, when He was baptized. (Mark 1:10)

White Garment : White is the symbol of purity. Laying the white garment on the child or dressing it to the child symbolizes the spiritual cleanliness of the child. Man lived a life of grace before he fell into sin and after the fall, he lost that life of grace. The white garment of baptism symbolizes that the baptised will be lifted up to a graceful life. It also symbolizes the garment of the Risen Lord. It reminds us that we are participating in the glory of the Risen Lord.

Anointing with Sacred Chrism: “Chrism”, the perfumed oil, consecrated in the name of Jesus Christ, is used to anoint the neophyte at the baptism. The anointing symbolizes the strengthening. Christians are strengthened:³ to live according to their faith³ to fight against the things which challenges the faith.The person is anointed as a priest, prophet and king to serve God and man.

Lighted Paschal Candle : Lighted Paschal Candle is a symbol of the Risen Lord. A small candle is lighted from the paschal candle at the baptismal rite. It symbolizes that the Risen Christ lights the soul of the neophyte. It entails that a follower of Christ does not walk in the dark but should always walk in the path of light.

57

Confirmation

Picture 12.2 - Bishop is giving the sacrament of confirmation

Confirmation in the Salvation History

We cannot separate Holy Spirit from the life of Jesus. He was conceived by the power of the Holy spirit.

Joseph son of David, do not fear to take Mary your wife, for that which conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit,(Matthew 1:20)

The Angel said to Mary.

The Holy spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore the child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God. (Luke 1:35)

When Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist at the river Jordan, Holy Spirit came upon him as a dove. At the begining of his public ministry, Jesus proclaimed:

58

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. (Luke 4:18)

Jesus also explained to his apostles, how they will act when they receive the Holy Spirit.

You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Sameria and to the end of the earth. (Acts 1:8)

Qualifications necessary to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation³ should have reveived the sacrament of Baptism³ should have completed the required age (age 14)³ should be in the state of grace (to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation in the state of grace, one should receive the sacrament of Reconciliation³ should receive a proper catechesis³ should be willing to receive the sacrament of Confirmation³ should be prepared to become a soldier of Christ³ should profess the Catholic faith (by renewing the baptismal promises)³ should stand for truth, justice and brotherhood in all circumstances as a way of fulfilling prophetic role.

Graces received through the Sacrament of Confirmation

³ Confirmation brings an increase and deepening of baptismal graces. ³ It renders our bond with the Church more perfect.³ It roots us more deeply in the divine filiation which makes us cry ‘Abba! Father!’³ It unites us more firmly to Christ³ It increases the gifts of the Holy Spirit in us³ It gives us a special strength of the Holy Spirit and defend the faith by word and action as true witnesses of Christ³ It gives special strength to confess the name of Christ boldly.

59

The Minster of Confirmation

The ordinary minister of Confirmation is the Bishop. When there is an adult Baptism, the priest can give the Confirmation. In danger of death, any priest should confirm the christian, who has not yet received the sacrament.

Activity

1. Write how you act as a confirmed person on following instances.

Incidentyour response

When one abuses faith in public

When one invites you to engage in an immoral action

When it is necessary to stand for truth

............................................................................

............................................................................

......................................

2. Write in a Table the symbolic things and their meanings which are used at the rite of Baptism.3. Write three things that you did to increase graces, received at confirmation.

For LifeI will act as a “soldier of Christ” whenever the challenges come against my faith and my purity.

60

13

The Sacraments of Healing

There are two Sacraments of Healing1. The Sacrament of Reconciliation2. The Sacrament of the sick anointing

These two sacraments are named as sacraments of Healing, because they give physical and spiritual healing to the person. Physical and spiritual healing are for the benefit of the eternal life.

The Sacrament of Reconciliation

Picture 13.1 - Receiving the Sacrament of Reconciliation

The other names for this sacrament.

1. The Sacrament of Conversion

This name is used because, one has to accept one's sinfulnes and return to God to receive forgiveness.

2. The Sacrament of Penance

This sacrament is named as the sacrament of penance because it incudes conversion, penance and satisfaction.

61

3. The Sacrament of Confession

It is called the sacrament of confession because each one has to confess his/her sins and receive forgiveness from God.

4. The Sacrament of Forgiveness

The main result of this sacrament is forgiveness. Through this sacrament God grants peace of mind to the penitant.

Inner repentance

Interior repentance is a radical reorientation of our whole life, a return, a conversion towards God with all our heart. It is an end of sin, turning away from evil, with repugnance towards the evil actions that we have committed. Because of that without an interior conversion, such penances remain sterile and false, “The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit; a broken, contrite and humble heart” (Ps 51:17).

The Acts of the penitant

Contrition is sorrow for sin and detestation for the sin committed, together with the resolution not to sin again.

Two types of contrition

perfect imperfect

Contrition is called “perfect” when it arises from love by which is God is loved above all else. It is also called as ‘contrition of charity.' Such contrition remits venial sins. It also obtains forgiveness of mortal sins, if it includes the firm resolution to have recourse to the sacrament of confession as soon as possible.

The contrition called “imperfect” is also a gift of God, a prompting of the Holy Spirt. It is born of the consideration of sin's ugliness or the fear of eternal damnation and the other penalties threatening the sinner (contrition of fear). It is an imperfect contrition, which cannot obtain the forgiveness of grave sins, but it requires one to obtain forgiveness in the sacrament of penance.

Among acts of penitent, contrition occupies first place.

62

In order to make a good confession, the penitant should follow the steps, given below.1. Examination of conscience2. Be sorry for the sins committed (Perfect contrition is recommend more than the imperfect contrition)3. Make a firm desire, not to sin again4. Confession of sins to a priest i.e receive the sacrament of Reconciliation5. Do works of penance and reparation.

One who receives the sacrament of Reconciliation with true contrition and conversion is 'rending heart but not the garment. ‘Rending Heart’ is correcting the wrong, done. e.g:- giving back the things stolen, paying the damage done, helping the poor and needy. The following things are very important for this.

Methods of Penance (Penitential Acts)³ Prayer³ Fasting³ Alms giving³ Bearing sufferings and disappointments patiently³ Even though we are tired, we have to fulfill our task, what was assigned with joy

The effects of the Sacrament of Reconcilliation

The whole power of this sacrament of penance consists in restoring us to God's grace and joining us with him in an intimate friendship. Reconciliation with God is the purpose and effect of this sacrament. For those who receive the sacrament of penance with contrite heart and religious disposition, “reconciliation is usually followed by peace and serenity of conscience with strong spiritual consolation”.

Through the Sacrament of Reconciliation

³ Brings about spiritual resurrection³ Restoration of the dignity of the children of God³ Blessing of the life of children of God ³ The most important thing out of all these is the friendship with God

63

Through the Sacrament of Reconcilliation

Rebuilds the broken relationship

Gives forgiveness of sins

Gives inner peace

Gives strength to make a firm decision , not to sin again

From the Holy Scripture

I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance.

(Luke 15:7)

The Lord turned and looked at Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said to him “Before the cock crows today; you will deny me three times.” And he went out and wept bitterly.” (Luke 22:61-62)

64

The Sacrament of Anointing of the Sick

Picture 13.2 - Anointing a sick person

Healing the sick was given an important place in Jesus' ministry. Healing the paralytic man (Matthew 9:2-7) and healing the man with a withered hand (Matthew 12:10-13) are some examples for that. The faith of the sick person was most important thing needed for the healing. Because of that, to the woman who touched the garment, Jesus said:

Daughter your faith has made you well.(Mark 5:34)

When Jesus sent out his apostles for the mission, they too healed the sick by anointing with oil.

They cast out many demons, and anointed with oil many who were sick and healed them.(Mark 6:13)

Not only that, St. James also teaches:

Is any among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him, and anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith will save the sick man, and the Lord will raise him up; if he has committed any sins, he will be forgiven.(James 5:14-15)

65

The sacrament of Anointing of the sick is given to those who are seriously ill by anointing them on the forehead and hands with duly blessed oil - pressed from olives or from other plants - saying, only once: “Through this Holy Anoniting may the Lord in his love and mercy help you with the grace of the Holy Spirit. May the Lord who frees you from sin save you and raise you up”. Amen

The Rite of Anointing of the Sick

² Introductory Rite² Penitential Rite² Liturgy of the Word² Prayers of the Faithful² Laying hands over the head ² Anoninting with the oil of infirmorum² Giving the Holy comminion² Blessing

According to these, it is clear that the sacrament of anointing of the sick was there in the early Church. Anointing of the sick is the sacrament which confers the spiritual strength, peace of mind and physical healing to a person who is seriously sick or in the old age.

Teaching of the Church about this Sacrament

This is one of the seven sacraments which was specially intended to strengthen the sick. From ancient times in the liturgical traditions of both East and West we have testimonies to the practice of anointing the sick with blessed oil. Over the centuries the anointing of the sick was confered more and more exclusively on those at the point death. Because of this it received the name “Extreme Unction” Notwithstanding this evolution the liturgy has never failed to beg the Lord that the sick person may recover his health if it would be conducive to his salvation. In the apostolic Constitution ‘sacred anoniting of sick’ (sacram unctionem infirmorum) following upon the Second Vaticon Council, Pope Paul VI teaches:

66

Effects of the Sacrament of Anointing of Sick³ The uniting of the sick person to the passion of Christ, for his own good and that of the whole Church.³ The Strengthening, peace and courage to endure in a christian manner the suffering of illness or old age.³ The forgiveness of sins if the sick person was not able to obtain it through the sacrament of penance.³ The restoration of health, if it is conducive to the salvation of his soul.³ The preparation for passing over to eternal life.

Activity1. Write the five steps which should be followed by a person who prepares to receive the Sacrament of Reconciliation.2. Explain the difference between the perfect contrition and imperfect contrition.3. Write three effects which we can receive from the sacrament of Anointing of the sick.

For Life² Examine your conscience at night prayers and repent for your sins done during the day.² Remember constantly the words said by the priest on Ash Wednesday while applying ash on your forehead, “you are dust, remember one day you become dust”

67

Holy Orders

There are two sacraments at the service of the community.1. The Sacrament of Holy Orders2. The Sacrament of Matrimony

These two sacraments are different from the other sacraments, because these two sacraments;1. Confir a particular mission in the Church 2. Build up the people of God3. Are directed towards the salvation of others as well to personal salvation if they contribute.

For an example,when children are born into a family, through the sacrament of Matrimony the parents receive the responsibility to train their children and guide them in faith. In the family, they provide a christian environments to their children. This is an obligation of those who receive the sacrament of holy orders and of the parents. To build up the people of God, new members are born into christian families. They are baptised by those in Holy Orders.

Holy Orders

Holy Orders is the sacrament, through which the mission entrusted by Christ to His Apostles, continues to be exercised in the Church until the end of time. There are three degrees of this sacrament.

Degrees of Holy Orders

Episcopacy (Bishops)

Presbyterate (Priests)

Diaconate (deacons)

The Bishop is the visible leader of the local Church. He participates in the mission of the Church with authority as a member of the Bishops' conference and a transmitter of the apostolic line.

14

68

All priests depend on their bishop to fulfill their mission. They take the responsibility either to work in a parish community or in a ecclesial office. The appointment is given by the bishop.

Deacons, participate in the ministry of divine word, divine worship, pastoral care and the charity under the pastoral authority of the Bishop of that diocese.

Two Types of Priests

Diocesan Priests Religious Priests

Under the leadership of the bishop they live and serve with the laity in their journey towards the kingdom of God.

They are priests who work under the Provincial superior of the congregation and follow a special constitution. They fortaste the heavenly bliss in this world. They work to realize the charism of the founder.

The two promises taken by the Diocesan priests 1. Obedience (enter into a life of obedience)2. Celibacy (enter into a life of Celibacy)

1. Obedience is :- The promise they take on the day of their ordination to obey the Bishop of the particular Diocese and his successors.

2. Celibacy is :-To dedicate their whole life to the Kingdom of God without being married.

Responsibilities of Priests

³ Preaching the Good News (Word of God)

³ Be a good shepherd to the people by listening to the people; finding out their needs, giving leadership to the lay leaders and getting their support

³ Celebrating divine worship, Liturgy deepens the faith of christians, Spirit of prayer brings about a spiritual happiness.

³ Cooperate with the bishop of the diocese.

³ Fulfill the spiritual needs of the people of God.

69

³ Responsibilities of Deacons³ Proclam the word of God in the mass and other liturgical services.³ Assist the Bishop and priests in the celebration of Holy Eucharist and the other liturgical services.³ Baptize according to the rite of Baptism³ Assist at and bless Marriges³ Preside over funerals³ Preside over Benediction and bless with the Blessed Sacrament.

Duties of lay people towards the priests.

³ Respect the priests and pray for them

³ Assist them in the Parish work

³ Help them to spread the Kingdom of God

³ Join in the teaching of Catechism

³ Help to organise the Liturgical services

³ Cooperate with the community work

³ Support them finacially and give them protection

Minister of Ordination

Only bishops can confer of Sacrament of Holy Orders. The essential rite of this Sacrament is the imposition of hands of the bishop on the head of the ordained and the recitations of the consecratory prayer.

Who can receive this Sacrament³ Only a baptized and confirmed man can receive this Sacrament³ One who can lead a celibate life and remain a celibate throughout his life for the sake of the kingdom of heaven.³ One who has such a call from God.³ The parents of the candidate should have received the sacrament of Matrimony³ The Candidate should have a good moral character³ The Candidate should have completed the required training and formation period³ Free will of the candidate³ Candidate should be healthy

70

The Bishop has the fulness of the sacrament of Holy Orders. Through the episcopal consecration, he receives all the authority as the Bishop of the diocease and the successors of the apostles. Bishops are appointed by the Pope. Bishops share the infallibility with Pope, when they declare the truths (dogmas) and morals of the Church.

Activity1. Write five services rendered by the parish priest.2. Name the three degrees of Holy Orders.

For Life How much do the religious men and women, through their prayers and sacrifices, work for the sick and the missionary activities? Appreciate their services. Help them in their work.Did you ever think that you have a vocation to do any kind of missionary activity?Always pray to God that God may grant His graces and strength to those who have received a vocation to overcome the temptations and fulfill their duties.

71

Sacrament of Matrimony

What God has joined together, let no man put asunder.(Mark 10:9)

Marriage is an irrevocable covenant by which a man and a woman establish between themselves with a firm decision. This covenant by which a man and a woman accept each other through their free will, is a life long relationship (Matthew 19:6). Therefore, even one or both parties decide to terminate their decision, the marriage does not end.

i.e. a man can marry only one wife and a woman can marry only one husband

Indissolubility means that there can be no divorce.

The two characteristics of the catholic marriage

UnityIndissolubility

Picture 15.1 - Rite of the Sacrament Matrimony

15

72

The purpose of the catholic marriage

Mutual assistance and completion love Procreation and education of children

The life long relationship of marriage can be compared to the relationship between Christ and the Church. This intimate union of marriage has to be built on mutual love. That love should be developed day by day.

The purpose of the catholic marriage is to receive the children as gifts of God and give them love, protection, nourishment, christian education and bring them up in a christian atmosphere.

Children are a gift from the Lord, the fruit of the womb, a reward.(Psalm 127:3)

Impediments to a Catholic Marriage

³ Age :- Should complete the 18th year of age, But those who are between 23-29 years can give birth to healthy children.³ Free will:- Nobody can force a person to marry a person whom he/she dislikes.³ Murder :- If one murders are's spouse or another's spouse with the aim of a marriage, that marriage is null and void.³ Consanguinity³ Mixed marriage

73

Marriage promise

The external sign of the sacrament of Matrimony is the marriage promise.

I ............ take you .............. to be my wife/husband. I promise to be true to you in good times and in bad times, in sickness and in health, I will love you and honour you all the days of my life.

The spouses mutually confer upon each other the sacrament of matrimony by expressing their consent before the Church. The priest is the witness on behalf of the Church. He blesses the marriage.

The marriage between two baptized persons is a sacrament and cannot be dissolved.

For this reason a man shall leave (his) father and (his) mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak in reference to Christ and the church. In any case, each one of you should love his wife as himself, and the wife should respect her husband.

(Eph 5:31-33)

74

Marriage and the Civil Law

According to the civil law of the Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, all marriages should be registered at the Registrar's Office. Accordingly the marriages solemnized at the Church, also should be registered in the government documents. It is done by the parish priest. He has the faculties to act as a Registrar. This registration is not relevant to the sacrament of matrimony. It is essential for the civil right of a person. If registered or not in government documents, marriages done at the Church is a sacrament and valid. Yet it has to be registered in the government documents so that his/her civil rights are safeguarded. Catholic are not allowed to register their marriages before non catholic ministers or civil Registrars. Such a marriage is not a sacrament.

Divorce and Annulment

There is no divorce in the Catholic Church. It is because the Church has no power to dissolve a valid marriage. It is a covenant, made before God. Yet after an inquiry, before a Church marriage tribunal, the tribunal declares some marriages are null and void from the beginning. That is, there had been no marriage on the ground of an impediment for marriage or lack of consent.

For a Fruitful Catholic Marriage³ Both parties should be Catholics³ There should be mutual love and trust³ Good character³ Mutual understanding ³ Self sacrifice³ Work for the unity of the family³ Spiritual orientation for the duties of married life.

So they are no longer two, but one flesh.

(Matthew 19:6)

75

Activity1. What is the advice you can give to a Catholic who is going to marry in the presence of a marriage Registrar.2. Make a list of essential things that are necessary for a successful married life.

For LifeWe should not have love affairs during our school days.

76

Religious Life

Historical background of the Religious life

In the early period monks lived a solitary monastic life. By the third century, they lived in communities. Paul of Thebes is the first Christian hermit to live in a monastry (227-342 A.D). At the time of St. Anthony of Egypt, a disciple of St. Paul of Thebes, there were about 5000 monks, who lived in deserts. Later there evolved 'community-based' monasticism. They lived an ascetic life in communities for their spiritual development.

St. Basil, St. Jerome, St. Augustin and St. Ambrose are considered to have done a great deal of work for the development of the monastic life. St. Benedict and St. Pachomius introduced a monastic rule for community life.

Religious should carefully keep before their minds the fact that the church presents Christ to believers and non believers alike in a striking manner daily through them. The church thus portrays Christ in contemplation on the mountain, in His proclamation of the kingdom of God to the multitudes, in his healing of the sick and maimed, in His work of converting sinners to a better life, in His solitude for youth and His goodness to all men, always obedience to the will of the father who sent Him. (Lumen Gentium 46)

Religious life is a gift and a voctation, given by God to live upto the baptismal promises more in a meaningful way or in a responsible manner. He/She, should proclaim the word of God, not only by word but also by deed.

The Three Religious vows

Chastity - Without entering into the married life they dedicate their whole life for the kingdom of God

Obedience - Promise to obey the Superior General of the Religious Order

Poverty - Not having any inheritance of their own.

16

77

Two Categories of Religious

OrdainedNon Ordained

ReligiousBrothersReligiousSisters

Characteristics of the Religious Life

Community LifePrayer LifeService Oriented Life

All the activities of the religious life are centered on the community. eg:- eating and praying as a community.

It is a salient feature of the Religious Life.Aim of the Religious life is to build up the kingdom of God. Because of that, they are sent out for different missions eg:- teaching and social service.

Religious Priests

³ Oblates of Mary ImmaculatePreach the good news to the poorEducation Apostolate Catechetical workEvangelization² Order of Sylvestro BenedictinesEducation ApostolateParish WorkLiving as a community for the glory of God

78

Congregations of Religious Brothers

³ Marist BrothersEducation ApostolateSelf employment for youth³ Brothers of CharityEducation ApostolateSocial service³ De La Salle BrothersEducation ApostolateYouth Apostolate³ Franciscan Missionary BrothersEvangelizationRunning orphanages

Congregations of Religious Sisters

³ Holy Framily SistersEducation Apostolate Catechetics Children, youth and Family ServiceMissionary activitiesVarious apostolates in parishes³ Sisters of Good Shepherd Education for Deaf and Dumb ChildrenGuidence for the youthHelping the desolate³ Sisters of Holy AngelsEducation ApostolateLooking after the children's HomesWork for the youth and children³ Sisters of CharityEducation ApostolateRunning homes for the elders CatecheticsEvangelization

79

³ Holy Cross SistersHealth ServicesApostolate for workers in the estates Catechetical workSocial Services³ Little Sisters of the Poor Work in the home for the aged

Activity1. Prepare an article on “Religious life” to a Catholic news paper.2. Write five examples of Religious life that can be imitated.3. Write a prayer, asking Christ the saviour to give strength and courage to all religious to overcome the temptations which challenge their Religious vocations.

For Life Let us appreciate the services of Religious.

80

17

Missionary Activity of Laity

Look at the picture above. There is a Church. Church is the centre of our christian life. On the day of baptism all of us joined to our Church and our parish. All who were baptized become members of the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ or the members of the Church and also belong to the People of God. Because of that, they participate in the common priesthood of Christ. This common priesthood received at the baptism, is different from the ministerial priesthood.

Common Priesthood Every Christian receive at baptismMinisterial Priesthood Those Christians who accepted the mission, entrusted to the apostles become ministerial priests at ordination.

81

Those who received the common priesthood of Christ share in the tripple functions of Christ.1. Kingly or shepherdic function2. Priestly Function 3. Prophetic Function

Those who receive the common priesthood of Christ have their own part to play in the mission of the whole christian people in the Church and in the world (C.C.C 899)

To succeed this mission all of us have to join and serve in the field of Lay Apostolates. Second Vatican Council teaches: “By reason of the knowledge competence or pre-eminence which they have, the laity are empowered - indeed, sometimes obliged - to manifest their opinion on those things which pertain to the good of the Church. If the occassion should arise this should be done through the institutions established by the Church.” (Lumen Gentium - 37)

Catholic Daham Pasala (Sunday School)

The main task of the prophetic role is evangelization (C.C.C 905). Evangelizationis not only the task of priests and the religious but it is also the prophetic role of the laity (C.C.C. 904). Therefore lay people who are capable and trained may also collaborate in Catechetical formation, in teaching the sacred sciences and in use of the communication media (C.C.C. 906). Because of that “Daham Pasala” is the best place for a Christian to engage in his prophetic function which is given by the common priesthood.

Aims³ Spread the kingdom of God by carrying out the mission, launched by Jesus Christ on this earth ³ Build up a deep intimate relationship with Jesus Christ ³ Form the Catholic children with moral values

Services² Having the Sunday school (Daham Pasala) every week and help the children to become the followers of Jesus Christ (catechism is taught voluntarily)² Celebrating the Children's Day² Holding the Bible quiz competitions² Holding a Daham Pasal examination at the end of every year² Updating the knowledge of the Catechists² Preparing catechists for the National Dharmacharya Exams

82

Legion of Mary (Legio Mariae)

This is an apostoliate by the laity for the laity. It was started by Frank duff. It is a strong Apostolic movement, functioned under the guidence of hierarchy and the mediation of Mother Mary. It is the biggest and the well organized lay apostolate.

Aims

³ First to meet and know Jesus Christ and live a holy life³ Love Mother Mary whole heartedly and make her known to the world and act with clear aims.³ Sanctification of its members through prayer, the sacraments and devotion to Mary and the Trinity.³ The missionary work and salvation of souls.

Services² Through the Rosary, spread and develop the Marian devotion² Teaching the children² Evangelizing by taking goodnews to others² Visit houses and find out their needs² Visit the hospitals and meet the sick.

Confraternity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus

This is a strong lay Apostolate movement, to respond to the immense love of Jesus. It helps to maintain incessantly the sanctity instituted by the Lord Himself.

Aims

³ Aims at spreading the devotion to the Sacred Heart ³ Participating, helping and dedicating in the service of the Church and that of the parish³ Live an examplary holy life³ Spread the word of God.

83

Services² Meditate “Holy Hour” at least once a month² Attend the Holy Mass on every First Friday and receive Holy Communion² Celebrating the feast of the Sacred Heart, feast of the Body and Blood of Jesus and feast of Christ, the King² Confession should be done at least once a month² Holy Hour should be done on the night of first Thursday personally or with the family.

Movement of Young Christian Students

This is a movement of catholic youth between 13 to 19. This student movement, runs for, by and with students. This movement is a great support to the Church Students discuss problems and aspirations unique to students, and there by to help to show the correct path. It helps the students to act according to their faith.

Today the Young Christian Students' movement has spread all over the world. It was started by His Eminence Joseph Leo Cardinal Cardijn. The headquaters of this movement is situated in Paris, France and the Asian headquarters is in Philippines. It is active in 110 countries. Its motto is 'we are not making revolution, we are the revolution'. The Young Christian Student's Movement calls all youth for an inner change.

Aims³ To inculate the values and attitudes, of Christ.³ To analyse their surroundings and realities judge by assessing the situation from the perspective of Christ and take action accordingly to improve the situation or make difference.³ Build kingdom of God based on Spirituality, related God and man, peace, truth, justice, equality, brotherhood.

The Secondary Aims of the movement of Young Christian Students

² Building up a servant oriented leadership² Developing the skills to come forward by avoiding shyness² Train and Develop the skills and talents² Developing human values

84

² Developing the attitudes, concepts and options² To live the morals, culture and values which are fading away from the society² Giving an understanding about self, family and the society² Building up an integral person with a sound spirituality² Developing the knowledge of Holy Trinity, Holy Bible, Sacred Living Tradition and the Church² To bring up a Christian with kingdom values.

Spirituality of the Movement of Young Christian Students

The methodology of this movement is its spirituality. It has three steps 1. See (Awareness) look into the world with the eyes of Jesus Christ 2. Judge (Reflection) Reflect about the worlds with the heart of Jesus Christ3. Act (Action) Act as Jesus Christ Acted

The there “H”s build and strengthen the lives of the adolescents1. Holy Eucharist2. Holy Bible3. Holy Rosary

Picture 17.1 - Holy EucharistPicture 17.2 - Holy Bible Picture 17.3 - Holy Rosary

Society of St. Vincent de Paul

This is an international catholic voluntary organization, dedicated to the sanctification of its members through serving the poor and disadvanatage. It was started by Blessed Frederic Ozanam in 1833.

Aims³ To find ways and means to proclaim the Christian life through charitable acts towards our helpless neighbours irrespective of their nationality, religion, caste or colour.³ To function not as a social service, but as a charitable service.

85

Services² Build up an awareness and euthusiasm among its members toward the pain and suffering of the people² Helping others, with care and concern² Share one's talents with others² Maintain and run the homes for the aged² Running Montesories² Holding health clinics

Possible Societies where adolescents can become members of² Catholic Daham pasala² Church Choir² Young Christian Students' Federation² Junior Legion of Mary² Solidarity of Children of Mary² The Confraternity of Sacred Heart of Jesus² The Society of St. Vincent de Paul

Jesus is inviting you to become a member of above mentioned societies and be an active Lay Apostle in your parish.

Activity1. Write five facts why you should become a member of lay apostolates to fulfil the duties, laid down by common priesthood.

2. “Today the Lay Leadership is very essential for the Church.” Referring to Lumen Gentium no 37 and 904-906 of Catechism of the Catholic Church, write an article with five points to support the above topic which can be published in a Catholic News paper.

For LifeJoin one of the pious associations in your parish, which gives an opportunity to adolescents to serve the Lord.

86

Protecting the Environment

Red Indian leader, Seattle says: “Rivers are our brothers. They quench our thirst; they carry our canoes and feed our children. We are part of the earth and it is part of us, the perfumed flowers are our sisters; The bear, the deer, the great eagle, these are our brothers; The rocky crest, the dew in the meadow, the body of heat of the pony and man all belong to the same family.

The Environment which the Red indian leader appreciated is a gift of God, because God is the Author of the creation. Earth, water, hills, animals are for man. The creation of God is complete. It was good. Therefore man has to protect the creation. Holy scripture testifies to it.

The importance of protecting the creation according to the First Creation Story

The Earth which was formless and void became complete, beautiful and good because of the creative work of God. By saying “Be fertile, multiply, fill the eanth and subdue it” God gave that beautiful world or the divine creation to man's care (Gen 1:28). The creation of God becomes a suitable place for man to live, if he consumes it with preservation. We call it “ Sustainable Development” Where ever there is sustainable development, equilibrium of the creation will be pro-tected automatically.

18

Picture 18.1 - ‘Environment’

87

Man was created into the “Image” and “Likeness” of God (Gen 1:26). In the begining God made the universe. Therefore the man who is having the image and likeness of God should re-create God's creation. Therefore man should develop the creation. He can participate in the creative action of God, when he tries to consume it carefully and work for its conservation.

God's will was to give man dominion over the creation (Gen 1:26). The Hebrew word for domain is “Radah.” It means “conservation”.

The importance of protecting the Environment according to the Second Creation Story

Having created the world, God created man and gave responsibility over creation. The book of Gensin says:.

The Lord God then took the man and settled him in the garden of Eden to cultivate and care for it. (Genesis 2:15)

According to the Second Creation Story, God has given two responsibilities to man.1. Cultivate :Hebrew word for “Cultivate” is ‘Abad.’. It means, “create by working.” Therefore he is called to work and create, i.e. “preserve the creation.” Therefore one who creates by work is a person who works to conserve the God's creation. 2. Take Care : The Hebrew word for “take care” is ‘shamar’ which means conservation Even from this, it is clear that man has to conserve the creation.

If man fulfils these two obligations, he can find a better world for him to live. It will bring prosperity and goodness to him.

Therefore if man does not protect the creation, he has to experience bad outcomes. Today man is facing a lot of natural disasters, because he has gone against God's plan. Some of them are floods, draughts earthslips ect. Therefore we should not misappropriate the creation.

88

You have an obligation to protect and develop the environment. It involves the following:² Love and honour the environment² Protect the fertility of the soil² Beautify the world where we live² Protect the equilibrium of the environment² Avoid polluting the environment² Live a simple life² Protect the resources for the future generation² Point out bad effects to the people who destroys the environment² Develop the physical resources and share them generously ² Encourage others to share their resources with others

Activity1. Write the meanings of the following Hebrew words (a) Radah (b) Abad (c) Shamar2. Explain briefly, how those three words are connected with the preservation of environment.3. Write and explain five activities that you can do to protect and develop the environment. 4. “We are part of the earth and it is a part of us” Write in 100 words how you develop the social, biological and physical environment as the co-creator of God.

For LifeBy honouring the creation and nature, love your God.

89

Peace

Make me a channel of peaceWhere there is hatred let me Bring your loveWhere there is injury, your pardenhord And when there is doubt true faith in you

Chorus:

Oh master grant that I may never seekSo much to be consoled as to consoleTo be understood as to understand To be loved as to love with all my soul

Make me a channel of your peaceWhere there's dispair in life let me bring hopeWhere there's darkness only light And where there's sadness ever joy

Make me a channel of your pence It is pardoning that we are pardenedIn living to all men that we receive And by dying that were born to eternal life

(Hyman Book 219)

Sing the above HymnMake a list of characteristics which you can gather to your life from this hymn

Catholic Teachings about Peace

“Shalom” is the Hebrew word for peace used in the old Testament. “Shalom” means inner peace. Truth, justice, love and freedom are the prerequisites for peace. To have inner peace, we have to honour and respect others and their human

19

90

rights. Accordingly peace has a broad and deep meaning than abscence of war and violence.

Peace is needed to protect and develop the lives of human beings. Building up justice, sensitivity to the needs of others, honouring and respecting other and brotherly love are important for that.

Jesus, the prince of peace came to this world to inculcate peace in the hearts of mankind. Peace between man and God, which was destroyed by the sin has been reestablished by his death on the Cross. Not only that, He invited all of us to be the channels of peace by saying “Blessed are the peacemakers (Matthew 5:9). Jesus also instituted the Sacrament of Reconciliation and gave authority to the Church to encourage every man to experience inner peace by receiving Sacrament of Reconciliation.

Peace is necessary to protect and develop the lives of mankind. Peace is a gift of Jesus Christ. Jealousy, hatred and revenge are the sins against Christian love. Catering such feelings within ourselves for a long period can lead to a greater sin. That is what happened to Cain. It is very important to control such feelings. Because of that, Jesus taught us.

I say to you, whoever is angry with his brother will be liable to judgement, and whoever says to his brother “Raqa” will be answerable to the Sanhedrin, and whoever says “You fool” will be liable to fiery Gehenna.(Matthew 5:22)

Love your enemies and pray for those who hurt you, is the main theme of Christ's teachings.

Love your enemies, and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your heavenly father, for he makes his sun rise on the bad and the good, and causes rain to fall on the just and the unjust.(Matthew 5:44-45)

91

To have, Peace the following are necessary: ² Justice² Love² Protecting the weak² Rejection of violent actions² Stoping murder² Protecting the human rights

Preventing the War

² It is dangerous to have war and collecting arms.² Poverty of the world can be wiped out from the money, spent on war² Christian duty is to reject the war and develop the inner peace² Organizations should work to reject war and work against producing the arms.

Prayer of Saint Francis of Assisi

Lord make me an instrument of your peace. Where there is hatred let me sow love; where there is injury, pardon; where there is doubt, faith; where there is despair, hope. where there is darkness, light, where there is sadness joy. Divine master, grant that I may not so much seek to be consoled as to console, to be understood as to understand, to be loved as to love. For it is in giving that we receive, it is in pardoning that we are pardoned, it is in dying that we are born again to eternal life.

Picture 19.1 - St. Francis of Assisi

92

We Should be the instruments of peace

We have to share peace that we gain by living in Jesus Christ, the prince of peace. In spite of troubles and obstacles, we should train ourselves constantly experience to inner peace by having a strong faith in the presence of Jesus Christ.

Activity1. Write five ways, with examples, how you are participating to maintain and protect the peace in your school.2. Write five responsibilities of the Church of Sri Lanka to develop peace among the people of our country.3. Prepare an article for the Wall Paper with 100 words on “Blessed are the peace makers.”4. Write five examples, which you can follow your life from the Prayer of St. Francis of Assisi.

For LifeLet us bring peace by working patiently.

always be calmdo not go against the goodnessBe people of good willalways respect justice and truthBe grateful Forget what you gave and remember what you receivedproclaim the goodnews to other

93

Spiritual and Corporal Works of Mercy

Benedict :- Father, is there an eternal life after death?Father :- Yes son, after death, there is an eternal life. Benedict :- Father, what should we do to gain eternal life Father :-Son, we should love our neighbour. For that we have to do works of Mercy. Benedict :- Father, what are works of Mercy?Father :-Son, you will understand. When you listen to this scripture passage carefully.

When the son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit upon his glorious throne, and all the nations will be assembled before him. And he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. He will place the sheep on his right and goats on his left. Then the king will say to those on his right “come, you who are blessed by my Father. Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and you welcomed me, naked you clothed me, ill and you cared for me, in prison and you visited me” Then the righteous will answer him and say, "Lord when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink? When did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you? When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you? And the king will say to them in reply, “Amen, I say to you, whatever you did for one of these least brothers of mine, you did it for me.” Then he will say to those on his left, “Depart from me, you accursed into the eternal fire prepared for the devils and his angels. For I was hungry, and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, a stranger and you gave me no welcome, naked and you gave me no

20

94

clothing, ill and in prison, and you did not care for me,” Then they will answer and say “Lord when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, and not minister to your needs? He will answer them.” “Amen I say to you, what you did not do for one of these least ones, you did not do for me.”

(Matthew 25:31-45)

I would give my bread to the hungry and my clothing to the naked, If I saw one of my people who had died and been thrown outside the walls of Nineveh, I would bury him.

(Tobit 1:17)

The above scripture passages show us that everybody will be judged at the sec-ond coming of Jesus. The criteria or the measurement for judgement is the acts of mercy. Though we have to observe the commandments of God as catholics, it will not fulfil our every obligation. If we want to gain the kingdom of God, we need to engage ourselves on spiritual and corporal acts of mercy.

The Corporal acts of mercy are concerned with the material needs others. There are 7 corporal work of mercy.

1. To feed the hungry 2. To give drink to the thirsty 3. To clothed the naked 4. To give shelter to the strangers 5. To visit the Sick 6. To free the captive 7. To bury the dead

95

The spiritual works of mercy are concerned with the spiritual needs of others. There are 7 spiritual works of mercy.1. To convert the sinner2. To instruct the ignorant3. To counsel the doubtful4. To comfort the afflicted5. To bear wrongs patiently6. To pardon offences willingly7. To pray for living and the dead

The spiritual needs of a man is fulfilled by the spiritual works of mercy. We can enrich others by sharing our knowledge, talents, skills, thoughts and aspirations with them.

The spiritual works of mercy are higher than the corporal works of mercy. Christian love is not something sentimental or just a feeling within the heart. It should be transformed into action. St. James says:

If a brother or sister has nothing to wear and has no food for the day, and one of you says to them “Go in peace, keep warm, and eat well but you do not give them the necessities of the body, what good is it” (James 2:15-16)

The main concern of the corporal works of mercy are to fulfil the needs of the human beings, Food, clothing, shelter, care in sickness and in sorrow are essential to a person to live as a human being. Christ has told clearly that our final reward will be decided on our charitable works i.e. caring the hungry, orphans, refugees, the sick and prisoners. Anybody who helps the above mentioned people and fulfil their needs is serving Christ, the king of the people of whole Universe.

96

Activity1. “To win the heavenly kingdom, we ought to do works of mercy” Write an article on above topic to the childrens' page of the Catholic Messenger.2. Write two spiritual acts of mercy which you can do to a person who persecute you or obstruct you.3. Mention some acts of mercy which you did or could do to people, who had been helpless due to natural disasters, which happened in the recent past. Explain your views in 100 words.

For LifeDo daily the spiritual and corporal works of mercy. At the Evening Prayers say a thanks giving prayer to God for works of mercy, you did during the day.

97

Precepts of the Church

It is the responsibility and the duty of the Church leaders to prepare the background to lead the Catholics according to the word of God. To realize that objective Church leaders have formulated rules and regulations. The precepts of the Church are important among them. The “Code of Cannon Law” contains regulations on Church discipline and matters of other things. The commandments of God, the precepts and the laws of the Church lead us to live as children of God. There are five precepts of the Church. 1. Attend Holy Mass on Sundays and other days of obligation and rest from servile work.2. Go to confession at least once a year.3. Receive Holy Eucharist (communion) at least once during the Easter.4. Observe the prescribed days of fasting and abstinence 5. Contribute to the needs of the Church.

1. Attend Holy Mass on Sundays and holy days of obligation and rest from servile work

Holy Mass is the sacrifice we offer to God, the Father, as people of God. Even though it was presided by the priest, at the celebration the whole people of God (faithful) join and partake in the offering. Because of this, chating, joking, looking around or engage in other distractions during the holy Mass are not worthy. Such things distract and disturb others. Therefore, such things have to be avoided.

The obligation of the Sunday and the holy days can be fulfilled by attending mass in the evening of the previous day. But if there is a Holy Mass in your Church on Sunday, it is more meaningful to attend the mass on Sunday itself.

The obligation does not bind persons who are seriously sick, living far away from the Church or engaged in essential services and other similar circumstances. In such instances they should try to attend a prayer service or engaged in private prayer. One should not consider sunday mass as a burden but as an act of gratitude to God for his loving kindness towards us. We should try to attend Mass, even on week days though it is not a precept.

21

98

This precept oblige us to attend the ‘entire’ mass from the entrance hymn to the final hymn. We should not be late for mass or going out before the end of the mass, as a habit unless it is an unavoidable circumstance. It is also important to to be in the Church before and after mass. The mental integrity that we receive from the private prayer before mass, helps us to attend mass with great devotion.

2. Go to confession at least once a year

This precept binds all who have reached the age of reason i.e. those who know what is right and what is wrong. Normally children are prepared for confession and first holy communion at the age of seven. As soon as a grave or a mortal sin is committed, it is a must to receive the Sacrament of Reconciliation. Therefore the second precept binds us to seek forgiveness for our sins through confession. If we make confession even without a grave sin, we receive the forgiveness of sins and the strength and graces to avoid sins. Therefore we are called to make a good confession in preparation for the Easter, the Church feast and Christmas. As a result we can celebrate those feast in a graceful manner.

3. Receive Holy Eucharist (Communion) at least once during the Easter

The Catholics of the Middle Age were afraid to receive Holy Eucharist (communion). Because of that, the Church implemented this precept. Today Church teaches us to receive Holy communion at every Eucharistic celebration. Our participation for the Holy Mass will be fulfilled when we receive Holy Communion.

4. Observe the prescribed days of fasting and abstinence

The Church establishes this precepts as an obligation of a christian to motivate them in the faith and belief.

99

Abstinence

The abstinence means, to abstain from meat and meat products on prescribed days. Such days are;² Ash Wednesday² Good Friday² All Fridays of the year

But if a solomnity falls on a friday, this obligation is not observed eg. If christmas falls on a Friday.

Fasting

Fasting implies only one full meal a day and a very light diet or no meal at other two meals.There are some reasons for fasting1. For atonement for our sins.2. To train self control3. To imitate Christ who fasted for forty days in the wilderness.

The Church teaches to give to the poor as alms what is saved by fasting because it is the main purpose of fasting. This precept binds only those catholics who have completed 18th year of age and not reached 60 years. The sick and the aged are free from this obligation. Those who are not obliged to fast are encouraged to do fasting voluntarily. Those who are in age 18-60 are obliged to fast on ash Wednesday and Good Friday. Besides prescribed days any body, is free to fast on the other days too.

5. Contribute to the needs of the Church

The stability of every institution or organization depends on the donations or the contributions of its members. This precept calls the faithful to contribute for the needs of the Church according to his/her own ability. Our donations, and contributions will be utilized to maintain the Church, the people who does the domestic work and other different charitable work in the parish.

100

Activity1. Name the five precepts of the Church.2. Write five points to show the importance of receiving the Holy communion, to a friend who is reluctant to receive holy communion.3. “Even by observing the precepts of the Church, one can make meaningful his christian life.” Write an article in 100 words to catholic magazine on the above topic.

For Life³ Let us give our help to maintain the Church³ Let us abstain from all meat food on fridays³ Let us receive sacrament of Reconciliation before the Church feast

101

The Lord's Prayer

Our father who art in heaven Hallowed be thy name, Thy kingdom come Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven

Give us this day our daily bread and forgive us our trespasses As we forgive those who trespass against us Lead us not into temptations But deliver us from all evil

Amen

The hymn, “Thri Eka Sura Jesune” is on Lord's Prayer. It was composed by Most Reverend Father Jacome Gonsalves. Lords prayer which was taught by Jesus our Lord, is the model prayer. The Holy scripture teaches us how we got this prayer.

Picture 22.1 - Jesus with his diciples

22

102

He was praying in a certain place, and when he had finished, one of his disciples said to him, “Lord, teach us to pray just as John taught his disciples.” (Luke 11:1)

According to that, Jesus taught this prayer, as an answer to his disciples. St. Luke and St. Matthew report this prayer in their gosples (Luke 11:2-4, Matthew 6:8-13)

St. Matthew reports:

Your Father knows what you need beforeYou ask him. This is how you are to pray:“Our father in heaven, hallowed be your nameyour kingdom come. your will be doneon earth as in heaven.Give us today our daily bread.and forgive us our trespassesas we forgive those who trespass against usand lead us not into temptationbut deliver us from the evil one.”Matthew 6:8-13

The first phrase of this prayer is 'Our father in heaven' Lets find out the meaning according to the teachings of the Church.

We can invoke God as “Father” because the son of God made man has revealed him to us. In this son, through Baptism, we are incorporated and adopted as sons of God. “Who art in heaven” does not refer to a place, but to God's majesty and his presence in the hearts of the just. Heaven, the Father's house, is the true homeland toward which we are heading and to which, already we belong C.C.C. 2798, 2802

103

In this prayer, there are three “wishes” and four petitions on spiritual and physical needs. Here are the meanings of those.

1. “Holy be your name”When we live a good life, it gives glory to God. Therefore we have to live a life to glorify God's name.

2. “Your kingdom come”This has a connection with the second coming of Jesus. Therefore we should pray for the fulness of the kingdom of God.

3. “Your Will be done on earth as it is in heaven”To complete the plan of salvation on this earth, it is our duty to integrate our will with Jesus' will.

4. “Give us this day our daily bread”Bread, our earthly sustanance and the spiritual sustanance, which are,1. The word of God and2. The Body of Christ, which is the Eucharis

We depend on; i. Divine Providence for our daily sustanance. ii. The nourishment we get through the word of God. iii. The nourishment of Eucharist.

5. “And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us”With the example of Jesus Christ we get parden for our sins only if we have forgiven the sins of others.

6. “Lead us not into temptations” By this we ask from God1. not to send temptations which lead us into sin.2. asking the help of the Holy Spirit to understand the situation which lead us into sin.3. asking God to grant us the graces to be watchful and to persevere.

104

The Catholic Church teaches us, how to say the Lord's prayer

Simple and faithful trust, humble and joyous assurance are the proper dispositions for one who prays the Our Father. C.C.C. 2797

Picture 22.2 - Reciting the Lord's Prayer

7. “But deliver us from Evil”We pray to God to grant graces to defeat satan and aquire the life in Jesus Christ.

Amen is a faith proclamation, which expresses our belief for the assurance of getting things what we prayed and asked. The summary of St. Matthew's gospel is in the Lord's prayers. It is a perfect of prayer, which teaches us not only to ask what we need but to wish what we request.

105

When we say this prayer, we strech out our hands and pray to our God. In this prayer, all of us are invited to maintain and keep up that posture because it is a main feature of a prayer.

Structure of the Lord's Prayer

³ Praising - Our father who art in heaven hallowed be thy Name³ Adoration - Your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven³ Asking for our Needs - Give us this day our daily bread³ Asking forgiveness - Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us³ Dependence on God's providence - Lead us not into temptations, but deliver us from all evil

Before we say the Lords prayer, we have to forgive those who have hurt, punished, damaged and insulted us. We must have the confidence that we are going to get what we ask. Then we experience the power of prayer.

Activity1. Mention three moments, that you tried to fulfil the will of God.2. Write three incidents when you practised “forgive us our sins, as we forgive those who sin against us.”

For Life Recite the Lord's Prayer at least three times a day and experience the power of it.

106

Marian Devotion

Mother Mary is the most honoured woman in the Catholic Church and no other woman will get her place in the future too. The prayers, books, hymns, literature, murals, paintings, names, shrines and Churches in her honour testify to her popularity. All these shows her specific place in the Catholic liturgy and devotions.

In the first three centuries, christians were martyred by the Roman emporers. Therefore during that period, the Church focused her attention on martyrs. Yet there are prooves to show that Mother Mary was given a special place in that period too. The best proof is from the third century. It is the prayer, “we fly to thy patronage.” It has been in use in the Church from the third century.

We fly to thy patronage, O Holy Mother of God. Despise not our petitions in our neessities, but deliver us always from all dangers, O glorious and blessed virgin. Amen.

Theological Background of Marian Devotion

Mary said to Elizabeth: “All generations will call me blessed” This became true through marian devotion. In marian devotion we do not worship but honor her. We worship only God the Father, Son and the Holy spirit.

C.C.C. 971

23

107

Here are the reasons why we honour Mother Mary1. She was the mother of the Son of God2. She was conceived without the original sin3. She preserved her virginity before and after child birth4. She was full of grace5. She was free from sin6. Assumed into heaven with body and soul

Immaculate conception

Due to a special grace, Mary was conceived in her mother's womb without the original sin. Pope Pius ix proclaimed:

The Most Blessed Virgin Mary was from the first moment of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege of almighty God and by virtue of the merits of Jesus Christ, Saviour of the human race, preserved immune from all stain of original sin. (C.C.C. 491)

Accordingly, since Mary was chosen to be the mother of the Son of God, God preserved her from the stain of original sin from the moment of her conception as she was chosen for a very special purpose. Just as Mary was preserved from original sin, we too were freed from original sin at our Baptism. Mary was not only preserved from original sin, she also kept away from all kinds of sin. Therefore those of us who have received the sacrament of Baptism should try to avoid sin and lead a holy life.

Assumption of Mother Mary

Ascension is going to heaven by ones own power. Only Jesus could do it. “No one has gone up to heaven, except the one who has come down from heaven (Jn 3:13). Assumption is that somebody is lifted up to heaven by another person. Therefore Mary was assumed into haven but she did not ascended into heaven. Catechism of the Catholic Church teaches:

108

Finally the Immaculate Virgin, preserved free from all stain of original sin, when the course of her earthly life was finished, was taken up body and soul into heavenly glory, and exalted by the Lord as Queen over all things, so that she might be the more fully conformed to her son, the Lord of lords and conqueror of sin and death. The Assumption of the Blessed virgin is a singular participation in her son's Resurrection and an anticipation of the Resurrection of other Christians. C.C.C. 966

Picture 23.1 - Assumption of Mother Mary

At the end of her life, Mother Mary with her body and soul was lifted up into heaven by God. Through her Assumption, Mother Mary was able to participate in Jesus' Resurrection, which God had promised to everybody. When we proclaim our belief in Mother Mary's Assumption, we too accept and believe and proclaim our rising again to eternal life. That was verified by the statement given by Jesus to his disciples.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back again and take you to myself, so that where I am, you also may be. (John 14:3)

109

Through his priestly prayer, we can understand the desire of Jesus to keep his loved ones near to him.

I wish that where I am they also may be with me.(John 17:24)

Mother Mary was able to assumed into heaven because she preserved herself from all sins and lived a good life. If we want to experience the same graceful life that Mary experienced, we have to avoid the sinful life. Then just as Mother Mary we too can enjoy and inherit the same reward in the second coming of Jesus in glory.

Apparitions of Mother Mary

Mother Mary appeared several times with a Rosary in her hand. Those apparitions gives the following messages:1. God knows that we are undergoing a difficult time.2. In this difficult time Mother Mary is showing her maternal love towards us.

Mother Mary's Apparition at Fatima

Picture 23.2 - Mother Mary's Apparition at Fatima

110

Mother Mary appeared several times to three children namely Francisco, Jacinta and Luci from 13th May to 13th October 1917 in Fatima in Portugal. She appeared on an oak tree with rosary in hand, shedding rays of light asked them to recite the Rosary for the conversion of all the sinners of the world.

Mother Mary's Apparition at Lourales

Picture 23.3 - Mother Mary's Apparition at Lourdes

It was at Lourdes in France from February 11th 1858 Mother Mary appeared 18 times to a girl named Bernadette and told about the importance of the devotion of the Rosary.

Mother Mary's Apparition at Velankanni

Picture 23.4 - Mother Mary's Apparition at Velankanni

111

In 16th centenary Mother Mary appeared near a pond with infant Jesus in her hand to a small boy who was selling milk. Mother Mary appeared as a poor wom-an and asked for some milk for the infant. The boy accepted her request and gave some milk. On reaching the customer's home, the boy apologized for his delay and the reduced amount of milk by relating the incident. On inspection, the man found the milk pot to be full and realized something miraculous had happened. They went to the pond. Mother Mary appeared to them once again. Some years later she appeared once again and cured a crippled boy.

Perpetual Help Novena

We have to attend Perpetual Help Novena to ask spiritual and worldly needs that we are in want of in day to day life and thereby experience the divine love.

Rosary

The word ‘Rosary’ is from the latin word, ‘Rosarium.’ In sinhala we call it ‘Japamalaya’. The meaning of the word, Rosarium is “garland of Roses” or ‘chain of roses.’ During the rosary we meditate the myteries or special incidents of the life of Jesus and Mother Mary. Since the rosary is a powerful weapon we have to keep it in the pocket, in the bag, in front of the vehicle and in hands of a dead person. It gives a protection effectively.

In appearance, Mother Mary requested to recite the rosary for the conversion of sinners in the world. We too are also sinners; Therefore, we have to say the Rosary every day for the conversion of ourselves and others. According to the Liturgical calander, Catholic Church annually celebrates many feasts in honour of Mother Mary.²January 01st - Mary, Mother of God² February 02nd- Presentation of our Lord² February 04th - Our Lady of Lanka² May 31st - Visitation² August 15th- Assumption² September 08th- Birth of Mary² December 08th- Immaculate Conception

112

Mary Mother of the Church Jesus on the cross gave his mother to his beloved disciple as his mother (Jn 19:25-27).Mother Mary was with the followers and the disciples till the ascension of Jesus and prayed continuously with them in one mind and one heart (Acts 1:14) Ac-cording to Catechism of the Catholic Church (963) Mother Mary is the Mother of Jesus and the Mother of the Church. According to the Encyclical “Mysterium Fidei” which means “The Mystery of Faith” by Pope Paul the vith Mary showed her maternal mediation by her apparitions throughout the world. She is with us invis-ibly even to day by interceding for us.

Activity1. Explain the difference between Ascension and Assumption.2. Write two messages you get from the apparitions of Mother Mary.3. Explain in brief the theological background of the Marian devotion.

For LifeTo receive the interceesion of Mother Mary recite the Holy Rosary everyday.

113

Liturgy of Hours (Divine Office)

During the day, God is praised hour by hour by praying liturgy of Hours

The four Hours at which the Divine office is prayed are:1. Morning Hour2. Midday Hour3. Evening Hour4. Night Hour

God who is the author of time should be praised and honoured during the hours of the day. Therefore the day could be sanctified by celebrating the Liturgy of Hours and Liturgy of Eucharist (mass). “At dawn I will plead before you” (Ps. 5:4)

According to the Hours, Divine office could be classified into four:1. Morning Prayer (Lauds)2. Midday Prayer

Picture 24.1 - Praying the Liturgy of hours

24

114

3. Evening Prayers (Vespers)4. Night Prayers (Compline)

Evening prayer is called “vespers.” The service on the eve of a Feast day is based on the Evening Prayer of the Liturgy of Hours. Therefore it is called Vespers.

As God is the Author of time and time belongs to Him, we praise God in every hour of the day. Every time, every hour and every moment belongs to God. Therefore there is no bad time; every time is auspicious; every time is good.

After the Second Vatican Council, this prayer is called “Liturgy of Hours.” Earlier it was called “Divine Office.” This word also gives the above meaning. Observing the Liturgy of hours is compulsory for priests and religious. This prayer is also called “Work of God” “Canonical Hours” and “Breviary.”

According to the advice given by the apostles to “pray constantly” (1 Thes 5:15; Eph 6:18) it is important to sanctify the day by Praying Liturgy of Hours from morning to evening. Priest, religions and laity participate in their common, priesthood received through baptism by praying “Liturgy of Hours.” This prayers of the Church is the address of the bride, the Church to her groom, Christ.

Liturgy of Hours is a community prayer of praising. Psalms are an indispensable part of “Liturgy of Hours.”

The Canticle of Zechariah (Benedictus) (Luke 1:68 -79) is used in the Morning Prayer: the Canticle of Mary (Magnificat) (Luke 1:46 -55) is used during the Evening Prayers, and the Song of Simeon (Nuncdimittis) (Lk 2:29 -32) is used at the Night Prayer. All three songs have been taken from the Gospel of Luke.

The Origin and development of the Divine Office

This is not a new way of prayer. Israelites prayed Psalms in synagogues. Even Jesus and His disciples participated in those synagogue prayers. Therefore the Divine Office or the Prayer of the Church has followed that tradition.

In the Apostohic age, christians attended the Divine Office in a specific time. Later this was celebrated in a solomn way with the participation of priests, religious and Lay people, headed by a bishop. Egeria, a spanish nun, was in Jerusalem from 381-384 AD. While in Jerusalem, she wrote a diary and in it she says that tradition of praying Divine Office was there at that time.

115

In the 4th century, after religious freedom, Religious orders developed. As a result there was a big change in the Divine Office too. The Divine Office which was headed by the Bishop with the Christian community at the Cathedral was known as “Cathedral Model”; and the divine office which were said in the monastries was known as 'monastic model.' Later in monasteries, the simple form of the prayer was lost and it become more complicate. The number of times which has to say the divine office increased. It was not suitable for the common people, because of that lay people kept away from the Divine Office. Instead of the divine office some supplementary prayers were introduced to the lay people. Therefore ‘Angelus’ was introduced to say in the morning, noon and evening. The Rosary also was a substitute said by the lay people.

Unfortunately the practice of Divine Office is still limited to priests and religious. It is not known or not popular among the lay people. But the Catholic Church will greatly appreciate if it is prayed as a family, as an institution or privately.

Model of the Morning and Evening Prayers

² Antiphon² Hymn - Entrance Hymn

² Contor - Antiphon IAll - Psalm - In the name of the father.......................... Antiphon I² Contor - Antiphon IIAll - Psalm / Conticle - In the name of the father........................... Antiphon II² Contor - Antiphon IIIAll - Canticle / Psalm - In the name of the father................... Antiphon III² Scripture Reading² Short Responsory² Antiphon

All In the morning canticle of Zechariah

In the evening canticle of Mary{

116

Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy spirit...Antiphon²Intercessions²Lord's Prayer²Concluding Prayer²Conclusion of the Hour

Activity1. Why the “Liturgy of Hours” is called by that name ?2. Name the four hours of the Divine Office?3. What is the Compulsory Book of the Holy Scripture, used in the Divine office?4. Write the structure of the Vespers of Liturgy of Hours.5. Mention another name, used for the Evening prayer of Liturgy of Hours

For LifePraise God by participating the vespers devotedly.

117

Meditation

Three people were discussing about the posture at prayer. First person said, kneeling down is the best posture to pray. The second said that the ascetics use to sit on the ground with crossed legs. The third gave a completely different opinion. He said when I am praying I keep my head looking up towards heaven, with closed eyes. While they were talking, there was an electrician at a nearby place who was reparing an electric system. He heard the discussion. He questioned. “I spend my life on these lamp posts. I believe my life depends on God. Some times I pray to God, while I am hanging my self with one leg. How do you describe that posture?”

At prayer, the most important thing is not the posture or not the place but the praying in one mind and one heart. One way of praying is meditation. As Christians our aim is not only to meditate for the sake of meditation but to have a good relationship with God. That should be strengthend by being in a meditative mood with the word of God, to be aware of God's presence. Jesus gives the best example of prayer and meditation.

According to the nos 2705 - 2706 of Catechism of the Catholic Church, Meditation is a quest: In this quest we must concern about two things.1. Purpose of Christian life2. Way of Christian life We must be concerned about these things in order to adhere and respond to, what the Lord is asking.

For meditation, different books may help but for Christians Sacred Scripture the word of God is the most suitable book. In meditation, when we read the sacred scripture challenges us. There by we can inquire, “Lord what do you want me to do?” It helps us to take a decision to act in line with God's expectations firm.

History of Meditation

Till the 16th Centenary “Lectio Divina” or the contemplative prayer was the method of meditation. There are four steps in the contemplative prayer.

25

118

1. Lectio or Read : In this step Holy Scripture is read 2. Meditatio or Meditate : In this step, Meditate upon the scripture passage which was read3. Oratio or Pray : In this step, pray over the scripture passage 4. Contemplatio or Contemplate : In this step, stay in the Lord, based on what was read and meditated.

Contemplative prayer can be done only by the people who are in the highest level of Meditation. Because of that, Discursive Meditation was introduced. There were two steps in it.1. Listening - Listening to the word of God2. Meditation - Meditation upon the word of God, and inquire how much it is lived. After evaluating, decide to live a pious life, by identifying and avoiding our failiures. The decision is made to do away with the wrong and to live a holy life.

The heresy of Quietism rose in 17th Century. The main concern of the Quietism was the 4th step of “Lectio Divina” which is staying with the Lord. But there was a small disadvantage in this kind of meditation because it was not based on sacred scripture.

The Heresy of Jansenism arose in 19th Century. Accordingly one has to be perfect to receive graces and to meditate and to enter into the sphere of contemplation.

After the second world war, Catholic Church resumed to give priority to meditation. The literature and the documents of Saint Therese of Avila and Saint John of the Cross influenced a lot for that renewal. The reawakening of the congregations, specially the Trappists, Benedictines and Carmelites influenced on that too.

Today even in Sri Lanka we can notice that many are incline towards meditation. According to that, it is good to give priority and importance for meditation. We can follow the following steps to do a good meditation.

1. Daily rise early in the morning2. Wash and clean the face, and have a cup of tea or a glass of water3. Sit in an easy porsture4. Focus your attention on breathing

119

5. Say a thanksgiving prayer for the New day6. Read the Gospel of the day or any other Gospel passage7. Meditate upon the gospel passage and see whether you have lived according to that8. Ask pardon from Jesus for the moments you have not lived 9. Take a decision to live accordingly in future10.Meditate on the actions what you can do accordingly 11. Pray for the needs (of you, your family, friends, others who are having different necessities)12.Do the same breathing exercise13.Start to study.

Meditation

Picture 25.1 - Common Meditation

Close your eyes, be silent for a moment, sing a hyman to Holy Spirit, and allow him to work within you. Deeply meditate that God is with us, and he is working within us.

Read the Gospel of the dayBe silent for a moment, Allow the words of that Gospel to echo within you.

Read that scripture passage againBe silent again for a moment, allow to reecho the words within you.

Read the word of God for the Third timeMeditate upon the things that are dear to you.

Read again the word of God for the fourth time, Stay in front of God, who so loved to give the message what was in the passage.

120

After staying for a moment like that, kneel down and say a prayer Sing a hymn.

Activity

1. Define “Meditation”2. Write the four steps of the “Contemplative prayer”

For LifeMeditate over the word of God everyday

“The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you”(Luck 1:35)

• All the Pictures were obtained from the internet.