==== BLOCKS ==== 

ENGLISH

Pupil's Book

Grade

5

Educational Publications Department

First Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0064-0

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Karunaratne and Sons (Pvt) Ltd,65 C, Thalgahavila Road, Midellamulahena, Horana.

ii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka

Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya

Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha

Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

Oba we apa vidya

Obamaya apa sathya

Oba we apa shakthi

Apa hada thula bhakthi

Oba apa aloke

Apage anuprane

Oba apa jeevana we

Apa mukthiya oba we

Apa mukthiya oba we

Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha

Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara

Eka mavakage daru kela bevina

Yamu yamu vee nopama

Prema vada sema bheda durerada

Namo, Namo Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iii

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®

AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ® |ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ

¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hßJØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.

BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.

v

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam Minister of Education

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

vi

Foreword

The world is modernized day by day. It is transformed every second. It is the education, which guides you to understand this phenomenon, preserve the good and confront the challenges of the changing world with strength. It is our objective to provide you with competencies required for you to work collaboratively with others, to adapt to the environment and the world of work, to spend the free time enjoyably and to become a citizen with a balanced personality.

The Educational Publications Department is dedicated to produce learning tools that would assist you to become a person with a balanced personality who would be able to develop positive relationships with national and international community.

By now, we have offered you about 25 types of textbooks from grades 1-4 under the new curriculum implemented from 2016. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I wish you all the best to enter the future world with pride by developing your skills and potentials through the use of this new textbook that is introduced for 2020.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka

Commissioner General of Educational Publications,

Educational Publications Department,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2019.04.10

Monitoring and SupervisionW.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka - Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications DepartmentDirectionW.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications DepartmentCo-ordinationW. Indumini Darshika - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentPanel of Editors

Dr. Chitra Jayathilake - Senior Lecturer - Grade I Department of English University of Sri Jayewardenepura

B.M. Weerasuriya - Director of Education Bilingual Education Branch Ministry of Education

H.A. Biyantha Kumari Wijepala - Assistant Lecturer National Institute of Education Maharagama

W. Indumini Darshika - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Panel of Writers

Lakkhana Rambukwella - Teacher WP/Pili/ Lankasabha Vidyalaya Moratuwa Madhuri Kannangara - Regional English Support Centre Kandy Peradeniya NCOE Penideniyavii

E.M. Sandhaya Napagoda - In-Service-Adviser (English) English and Foreign Languages Branch Ministry of Education

N. Krishanthi Shiwanthika - Teacher Maris Stella College Negombo

B.M. Jayamali Dariju - Teacher Newstead College Negombo

K.P.I.P. Karunanayaka - Lecturer Pasdunrata National College of Education Proof Reading

Jayalath Wickramasinghe - Teacher Eheliyagoda National CollegeLanguage Editing

E.A. Amarasena - Parliamentary Interpreter Illustrations

K.A. Saman Kalubowila - Lecturer Hapitagama National College of Education Mirigama

Cover Designing

D.M. Jayani Nisansala Dissanayaka - Educational Publications Department

Computer Designing & Formatting

D.M. Jayani Nisansala Dissanayaka - Educational Publications Department

viii

1 Our motherland Sri Lanka 1 - 13

2 Nature is our friend 14 - 27

3 Caring and sharing28 - 42

10 Our future128 -141

Let's celebrate443 - 56

5 Let's enjoy sports57 - 69

Healthy living670 - 83

7 A day at the fair84 - 98

8 Safety first99 -110

9 Around the world111 -127

CONTENTS

ix

x

For free distribution1

1

Our motherland Sri Lanka

Lesson 1

Let's sing.

belongharmony

creed lendracecaste kith and kin

This land belongs to you

This land belongs to you.This land belongs to me.This land belongs to all of us,to live in harmony///.

For free distribution2

Whatever the race may bewhatever the caste or creedwhatever the colour of our skinwe’re all kith and kin.

North, South, East and Westthe parts of one island,to make it rich and beautifullet’s lend a helping hand.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6H933tPc0Zw

Get the students to sing the song.

Lesson 2

Look and say.

Where do you come from?

I’m from...What

I take part in...

It’s the National Junior Sports Festival. Senuri, Kumar, Nisal and Navaz are participating in it. They

For free distribution3

are taking part in different games. Nisal is at the registration desk.

Northern

North Central

Uva

North Western

Central

Eastern

Western

Sabaragamuwa

Southern

I’m from the North Central Province.

For free distribution4

Teacher : Good morning, what’s your name?Nisal : Good morning, sir. I’m Nisal. Teacher : Where do you come from?

Nisal : I’m from Anuradhapura.Teacher : What’s your province?Nisal : I’m from the North Central Province.Teacher : What’s your event?Nisal : I take part in swimming.Teacher : Well, good luck!Nisal : Thank you, sir.

Introduce the nine provinces of Sri Lanka. Get the students to act out the dialogue.

Lesson 3

Read aloud.

islandzoneruinspeace

harmonywaterfallforest

For free distribution5

There are many forests, mountains and

waterfalls.

We live in our country in peace and

harmony.

The national flower is the Blue Water Lily.

We all love our country.The national bird is the jungle fowl.

Our country Sri Lanka, is a beautiful island.

It has many ruins.

It has a dry zone. It has a wet zone.

The island’s beach is beautiful.

For free distribution6

Lesson 4

Listen and answer.

stapleflour

favourite

Ten students from Japan came to Sri Lanka. They visited Gajaba Vidyalaya. The students of Gajaba Vidyalaya welcomed them. They introduced Sri Lankan food to their Japanese friends.

Get the students to read the sentences that describe Sri Lanka. Ask them to do the writing activity in the workbook.

For free distribution7

This is roti. We make it with coconut and

flour.

Rice is our staple* food. We eat rice and curry. We make fish, meat, vegetables and green leaves.

These are hoppers. We make them with rice flour and coconut milk.

These are string hoppers. We make them with rice flour.

This is pittu. We make it with rice flour and coconut.

This is dosai. It is my favourite dish. We make it with rice flour.

staple* food - main food

Prepare the students for listening. Give them the following questions before listening.1. How many food items did you hear?2. What are they?Now, read the conversation or act it out.

For free distribution8

Lesson 5

Read and answer.

rare

climatetropical

clear

attractive

colourful

The students of Ruhunu Vidyalaya visited the Seethawaka Botanical Garden. This is a leaflet about it.

Seethawaka Botanical Garden

For free distribution9

Seethawaka Botanical Garden is in Avissawella. It is in the Western Province. It has 106 acres of land. Its opening ceremony for visitors was in 2014. It has a tropical climate. There are many rare plants and trees in it. There are attractive flowers and colourful birds. There is a lake with clear water. Visitors can have boat rides in the river. The garden is open from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. everyday for visitors.

1. Where is the Seethawaka

Botanical Garden?

2. What is the area of the land?

3. When was the opening ceremony

of the garden?

For free distribution10

4. What can you see there?

5. When can people visit the park?

Lesson 6

Let’s play a game.

Who canName of the studentspeak Sinhalese and Tamil? say “thank you” in three languages?name all the nine provinces in Sri Lanka?

name ten districts in Sri Lanka?name the national sport of Sri Lanka?

draw the map of Sri Lanka?

For free distribution11

Read aloud.

Lesson 7

chip chinchair chess

chip ship shoes chest shirt

chin shovel chain shop chop

cheese sheep cherry shot child

chair shark cheek shake chocolate

Get the students to practise asking questions using “Can you..........?” e.g.: Can you speak Sinhalese and Tamil? Get the students to go around the class and gather information. Ask them to report. e.g.: Sandani can speak Sinhalese and Tamil.

For free distribution12

Get the students to throw a dice and read the words aloud. Do it in pairs or groups.

Recite and enjoy.

Lesson 8

good June

book flute

It’s a good eveningfull of happiness.I took a book to read.I put some firewood into the fire.It’s fine time.I wouldn’t want to get up.

chess shell chat shore change

church shadow chick share child

For free distribution13

I love June.I can sing a song.I can play the flute.I am never rude.I have a good mood.I am a cool friend.Let’s play a game.

1. Ask the students to stand in two lines.2. Place a chair in front of them at a distance.3. Paste a word on the chair. Pronounce it aloud.4. Then, read out words given below. Add more words.5. Instruct the first student in each line to listen to the teacher and run to the chair and sit on it if it sounds like the word pasted on the chair.6. The one who sits on the chair first is the winner. 7. Continue the game. Paste words with long vowels and with short vowels interchangeably on the chair.8. Take the students out into the garden if possible to do this activity.

Get the students to recite the poem. For the game, use the following words with long and short vowels interchangeably. Add more words.(shoes/put/look/boot/rude/shoot/book/cook/should/foot/glue/ruler/room/school/ soon)

For free distribution14

2

Nature is our friend

Lesson 1Recite and enjoy.

seedearth pat

shower

grow sow hole

May Time Magic

A little seedfor me to sow.A little earthto make it grow.

A little hole,a little pat,a little wish,and that is that.

For free distribution15

A little sun,a little shower,a little while,and then - a flower!

By : Mabel Watts

Recite the poem together with the students. Get them to act it out.

Let's sing.

Lesson 2

roots buds

leaves seeds squirrels

bugs snake breathe

trunks fruits

Trees, Trees, Trees

Trees, trees, treeshave roots and trunks and leaves.

Trees, trees, treeshave buds and fruits and seeds

a home for birds and beesa home for nest of flying birdsa home for bees and brown batshome for squirrels, bugs and snakes.

For free distribution16

Trees give us all kinds of fruitsand wood for chairs - rubber for boots.They clean up the air and keep itfresh, help us to breathe.They need only sunlight, soil and water.Maybe a little love.Trees protect uslet’s protect them too!

Get the students to sing the poem. Ask them the following questions:• What are the parts of a tree?• Who lives in trees?• What are the uses of trees?• What do trees need?

Point and say.

Lesson 3

It’s a/ an/ the

For free distribution17

rainbow, island, waterfall, mountain, clouds, forest, field, sun, beach, moon, desert

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

For free distribution18

It’s a waterfall.

What’s in picture 1?

What’s in picture 2?

It’s the

sun.

For free distribution19

What’s in picture 11?

It's an island.

Ask the students to ask questions and answer in pairs. Pay attention to the articles ‘a’, ‘an’, and ‘the’.

Listen, answer and act out.

Lesson 4

trick lievillagers

forest shout wolf save

shepherd

For free distribution20

Shepherd Boy and the Wolf

There was a shepherd boy. He looked after a flock of sheep. He took the sheep to the forest every morning. He brought them back in the evening. One day he played a trick with the villagers. He shouted,‘‘Help, help, there is a wolf’’.All the villagers came to save the boy. They asked the boy, ‘‘Where is the wolf?” The boy replied, ‘‘There is no wolf. It’s just a trick.’’

For free distribution21

The villagers were very angry.

The boy played the trick many days. One day a wolf really came. The boy cried for help. This time nobody came to help him. The wolf killed all the sheep. The boy never lied again.

Read the story aloud. Ask the following questions.• Who looked after the sheep?• Where did he take the sheep?• Who were angry? Why?• Did the villagers come in when the wolf had come? • What did the wolf do in the end?Get the students to act out the story.

For free distribution22

Listen and clap.

Lesson 5

bee wheel

jeep sleepbeep sheep

Bee and sheepBee and sheep got in their jeep.They drove all night and didn't sleep. One wheel fell offand rolled away. They beeped the hornthe rest of the way.

Adapted from eepoem : Susan Jones

Get the students to listen to the vowel sound /i:/ and clap.

For free distribution23

Let's play a game.

Lesson 6

Scavenger Hunt Game-Take the students out into the garden. Ask them to form groups of three. Then, give the group a list of things to find from the school garden. Give them some reasonable time to find the object and to report back. After they have returned, ask them to describe the things they have found. e.g. - 1. a round object 2. something colourful 3. something not heavy 4. a plastic object 5. something made of wood 6. something yellow 7. something green

Add more things. Use this activity to introduce new vocabulary to them.

Read and match.

Lesson 7

It walks slowly. It has a house on it.

bird

1IA

For free distribution24

It has three lines on its back. It comes to eat fruit in our garden.

bee

2

II

B

It is an insect. It is small and green. It has two antennae.

squirrel

3IIIC

It collects nectar from flowers. It lives in a hive.

snail

4IVD

It has no legs. It lives in the soil.frog

5VE

For free distribution25

It has wings. It can fly. It has a beak.

worm

6VIF

It has a green body. It jumps high up. It lives in a pond.

grasshopper

7VIIG

It lives in a web. It eats insects.snail

8VIIIH

It has long ears. It likes to eat carrot.spider

9

IXI

For free distribution26

Read and sort.

Lesson 8

A tree speaks

AB

For free distribution27

Ask the students to read the sentences and match them with the two sides of the tree marked as A and B.

I have fruit.I don’t have fruit.Birds sit on me.Squirrels play on my branches.Birds eat my fruit.My bark is dry.I don’t have flowers.I give shelter.There are no leaves on my branches.Birds do not sit on me.I have flowers.I have dry branches.

For free distribution28

3

Caring and sharing

Lesson 1Sing, act out and answer.

sad

angry yummyhungry

sleepy scared

happy

When it’s sunny, I’m happy,when it’s rainy, I’m sad,when it’s lunchtime, I’m hungry,time to eat, yummy!

For free distribution29

When it’s noisy, I’m angry,when it’s stormy, I’m scared,when it’s bedtime, I’m sleepy,time to sleep, good night!

• It’s sunny now. How do you feel?

• It’s rainy now. How do you feel?

• It’s noisy now. How do you feel?

• It’s the lunchtime now. How do you

feel?

• It’s the bedtime now. How do you

feel?

First sing the song and get the students to act it out. Then, ask them to describe how they feel in different situations. Add more situations.

For free distribution30

Look and say.

Lesson 2

sweep

water

wash

cook

I sweep the floor.

I help my mother to cook.

For free distribution31

I water the plants.

We do the washing-up.

For free distribution32

How do you help out around the house?

Get the students to read the sentences. Then ask the students to describe how they help with household chores and to share their responses. Elicit more verbs from them.

Listen and do.

Lesson 3

Kumar is not well. His friends are

making a Get-Well Soon card for him.

For free distribution33

You need:• a piece of Bristol board in any colour / cardboard / disposable milk powder carton• dried petals and leaves• a pair of scissors• glue• coloured pencilsMethod:1. Take the piece of Bristol board, cardboard or carton.2. Cut it in any shape.3. Paste the dried flowers and leaves.4. Colour or draw any design.5. Write “Get-Well Soon” at the top of the card.6. Write a message to your friend inside the card.

Get the students to bring the necessary materials to prepare the card. Give them instructions on how to make the card.

For free distribution34

This is my friend, Ruwani.

She is from Kalutara. She is ten years old. Her hobby is reading books. She likes ice-cream.

Get the students to stand up and move around. Ask them to talk to a friend and share personal information as given above. Get them to introduce his/her friend. Add more information.

Let’s play a game.

Lesson 4

He/she likes

This is...

He /she is His / her hobby is…

He/she is from

For free distribution35

Lesson 5

Read aloud.

three

thumb throne

thumb

throne

three

throw

theatre

For free distribution36

Get the students to read the given words aloud. Ask them to find more words starting with “th”. Ask them to read aloud the words they found. Do it as a group work.

Read and answer.

Lesson 6

prefectcelebrate

donationdonate

NoticeThe 50th birthday of our school is in July. We will celebrate it on 31st July. We will make a donation to a Children’s Home. We collect school supplies for it. Please bring books, pencils and school bags. We will donate them and celebrate our birthday. Contact your class prefect for more details.Junior Prefects’ Guild

For free distribution37

1. When is the birthday of the school?

2. Where do they make the donation to?

3. What do they collect?

4. What can the students bring for donation?

5. What would you like to donate to a Children’s Home?

Read aloud.

Lesson 7

farm

For free distribution38

garden

guitar

market

For free distribution39

park

star

For free distribution40

Read and answer.

Lesson 8

he itthey me

them you

his your

There was a rabbit. Its name was Bunny. His birthday was last Monday. He got a lot of presents. His friends played with him. But, he didn’t share his new toys with them.

- “Shall we play with your new toys?”- “No, they are mine. I can’t give them to you.”

For free distribution41

His friends were very sad. They went away. They never played with Bunny. They played outside. Bunny was alone. He could not play with his friends. He

played alone in his room. He was sad. He wanted his friends. He called them.

“I’m sorry. Please come to play with

me.”His friends came back. He was very happy. He shared all his toys with them.

For free distribution42

True or false?

1. The rabbit’s name was Kim.2. He got many presents for his birthday.3. At first, he shared his toys with his friends.4. His friends were very sad.5. He played outside with his friends.

For free distribution43

4

Let’s celebrate

Lesson 1Read and answer.

We/I celebrate……

We celebrate

What do you celebrate?

For free distribution44

• What do you celebrate at home?

We/ I celebrate………• What do you celebrate at school?• What do you celebrate in Sri Lanka?

Ask the students to look at the picture clues of different celebrations. Ask them to guess them. Then, ask the students the above questions. Add more questions of your choice.

Read and answer.Lesson 2

Children’s Day Celebrations – 2020

Come and join us for a day of fun!

Singing, storytelling, gift exchange, games and food

Date: 01 October 2020Time: 10.00 a.m. – 12.00 noonVenue: School Main Hall

Organized bySenior Prefects' AssociationGemunu Vidyalaya

For free distribution45

• The children’s day celebration is

on .............................................

• It is from ...................................

• It is at .......................................

• The items are ........................,

story telling, ..............................

and ..........................

Read and answer.

Lesson 3

festival

celebrate

pandols prayalms doorstepobserve

lanternsdeliciousdecorate

The students of Gajaba Vidyalaya made a presentation on Sri Lankan festivals.

For free distribution46

Thai Pongal is a Hindu festival. It is in January.We thank the Sun God. We wear beautiful clothes. We go to kovil. We make pongal rice. We draw kolam in front of the

doorstep.

Vesak is in May. It is a Buddhist festival. We wear white clothes. We go to temple. We observe sil. We organize dansal. We give alms. We make colourful lanterns and beautiful pandols.

For free distribution47

Muslims

celebrate Ramadan. We fast for one month. We break the fast when we see the new moon. We go to mosque to pray. We wear new clothes. We visit relatives and friends. We prepare delicious food. We share them with friends and relatives.

Christmas is in December.We decorate Christmas trees. We wear beautiful clothes. We go to church and pray. We sing carols. Santa Claus brings us gifts.

For free distribution48

1. Hindus draw ………………. in front of the doorstep.2. Buddhists give …………………. for Vesak.3. Muslims break ……………… when they see the new …………………4. Santa Claus brings ……………. for children.

Let's sing.

Lesson 4

Celebrate good times, come on //There’s a party going on right herea celebration to last throughout the year.So bring your good times and your laughter too.We’re going to celebrate your party with you.

For free distribution49

Come on celebrationLet’s celebrate and have a good time.We’re going to celebrate and have a good time.It’s time to come together.It’s up to you, what’s your pleasure?Everyone around the world come on!

Adapted from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Lu41LulQos

Read, ask and answer.

Lesson 5

The students of Gajaba Vidyalaya went to Kandy. They went to see the Kandy Perahera. They wrote about it for the class wallpaper.

WhatHow many

WhenWho

For free distribution50

The Kandy Perahera is a beautiful pageant. It is in August. King Keerthi Sri Rajasinghe started it first.

First, you hear the whip crackers cracking their whips. They lead the Perahera. The flag bearers, sword carriers and fireball acrobats come next. Peramunerala and hewisi troupes follow them. Some Nilames, drummers and Kandyan dancers are next in line. The Kandyan dancers add beauty to the Perahera.

For free distribution51

The tusker carries the Sacred Tooth Relic. The Diyawadana Nilame and other Nilames follow the tusker. Over a hundred elephants take part in this event. The four Dewala Peraheras go after that. The Perahera lasts for more than three hours. People around the world come to see it.

Read the text aloud to students. Ask them to get into groups of five and make questions for highlighted sentences. Then each student should go around the class and interview two students and record their answers.

For free distribution52

Read and answer.

Lesson 6

eco-hero

award

raise funds

received

solve come acrossconflict

transportssafely

valuable

Anya de Saram-Larssen is a thirteen-year-old girl. She lives in Colombo. She is a young eco-hero. She received the International Young Eco-Hero Award in 2018. She tried to solve the human-elephant conflict in Wasgamuwa. She received this award for that.

She raised funds for an “ele- friendly bus”. It now transports children safely to schools. Earlier, they walked to school. Sometimes, they came across dangerous elephants.

For free distribution53

In rural areas, elephants come to villages looking for food. Children cannot go to school because of this problem. Anya says,“Elephants are valuable”.“We must protect them.” She is trying to educate people how to live together with elephants.

• What is the name of the girl?• How old is she?• Where does she live?• What did she receive?• When did she receive it?• Earlier, why couldn’t children go to school?• How do children go to school now?

Read the text aloud to students. Ask them to answer the questions orally. Draw their attention to the question words.

For free distribution54

Listen and say.

Lesson 7

1

2

3

4

5

Do the listening activity given at the end of this unit. Ask the students to select the picture that matches each description.

For free distribution55

Recite and enjoy.Lesson 8

Look at that haton the catwho sat on the matI want that hat.

Shall I playoutside today?The sky is grayI will go another day!

Get the students to read the poem aloud. Then do the following game.

Leaf pasting game:-

Make 40 leaves cut out of Bristol board. Write 20 short and 20 long vowel words on them. Use the vowel sound focused in the poem. Put them in a box. Take the children out of the class. Divide them into two groups. Take two Bristol boards and paste one word with the short vowel given in the poem on one board and a word with the long vowel in the poem on the other. Ask one member of each group to come and select a word, read it and paste it on the correct board with the similar sounding word. Once they all have finished pasting, the teacher can check. For each correct word, the teacher can paste a green dot. The team that gets the highest number of green dots will win.

For free distribution56

Listening Text - Lesson 7

• This is a Chinese festival. It marks the end of the Chinese New Year. On this day, children go out and carry paper lanterns. They solve riddles on lanterns.

• People celebrate it on 1st of May. It’s a public holiday. It’s a celebration of the working people. There are celebrations in many countries.

• We celebrate Halloween on 31st of October. It’s a fun holiday for children. On that day, children dress up in costumes. They go from door to door asking for treats.

• People all over the world celebrate it on the 1st of January. At midnight, there are fireworks. We wish our friends and family a happy new year.

• We celebrate Independence Day on 4th of February. Sri Lanka gained independence on this day. It’s a national holiday. People celebrate it all over the country. There are ceremonies, dances, parades and cultural events.

For free distribution57

123

4

5

6

7

Lesson 1Look and say.

tennis table tennisbasketballhockey cricketfootball badminton

5

Let’s enjoy sports

For free distribution58

1) ..............................

2) ..............................table tennis

3) ..............................

4) ..............................

5) ..............................

6) ..............................

7) ..............................

Point at each picture and ask the students to name the game.

For free distribution59

Read and answer.

Lesson 2

championsfavourite

playerbestshooternational

Sonia : What are you looking at?

Waruni : It’s a picture of our netball

team.

Sonia : Really! Netball is my

favourite game.

Waruni : They’re the 2018

Asian Champions.

For free distribution60

Sonia : Who is that tall player

behind?

Waruni : She’s Tharjini Sivalingam.

Sonia : She is very tall !

Waruni : She was the world’s best

shooter in 2011.

Sonia : Hurrah! It’s our national

team.

Get the students to read/enact the dialogue. Ask the following questions.

• What is your favourite game/sport?

• With whom do you play?

• Who is your favourite sportsperson?

• What sports are there in your school?

Ask more questions.

For free distribution61

Read and answer.

Lesson 3

encouraged

marathontook part

race laughedspirit overtook

Kumar made a speech about his favourite sportsperson.

For free distribution62

This is Marathon Karu. His name is R. J. K. Karunananda. He was a “ lucky loser”. He took part in the Marathon race at the 1964 Olympics. He was ill that day. But, he ran the race. Other runners soon overtook him. But, he did not give up. He finished the race alone. Some people laughed at him. Others encouraged him. He did not win. But, he won the hearts of many people. He showed the real spirit of sports. “Not to win but to take part.”

For free distribution63

• Kumar’s speech is about ……………....….• He was a…………………………• He took part in the ……………………• He ………………………….. the race.• He showed the ……………………. of sports.

Read aloud.Lesson 4

1st – first2nd – second

100 m running is the 1st event. The 2nd event is the sack race. All participants, please report to the ground.

For free distribution64

Introduce the ordinals from 1st to 31st.

Read and match.

Lesson 5

1

2

3

4

5

6

For free distribution65

Olympic ringsan athletea torcha medal Olympic flagpodium

Read aloud.

Lesson 6

Bug is on a rugrun, bug, run!Bug is on a mugrun, bug, run!Bug is on a tubrun, bug, run!Run! Run!

For free distribution66

Read aloud.Lesson 7kicking

passing batting

skippinghitting ridingthrowing

They are kicking the ball.

He is batting.

For free distribution67

They are passing the ball.

He is throwing the shot put.

They are hitting the shuttlecock.

For free distribution68

He is riding a bicycle.

She is skipping

a rope.

For free distribution69

Let's sing.Lesson 8

Come let’s play.Come have fun.Sports and gamesmake us alive.

Passing the ball.Blocking the ball.Shooting the ball.That is netball.

Throw the ball.Catching the ball.Run through wickets.That is cricket.

Cheering, cheering.At last peering.Tears and smileslast for a mile.

Sports give strength.It gives fun.Loads of smile.Freely given.

For free distribution70

6

Healthy living

Lesson 1Read and match.

1

2

For free distribution71

3

4

5

6wake up early in the morning

make your bed

have a glass of water

brush your teeth

wash your face

have a healthy breakfast

For free distribution72

Ask the students to look at the pictures and match them with the given phrases.

Let's make wood apple juice.

Lesson 2

pinchwood apple

You need: • two or three ripe wood apples • one cup of coconut milk• five tea-spoons of sugar• a pinch of salt• two glasses of water

Method:• Break the wood apples.• Put the flesh into a bowl.• Add coconut milk, water and sugar to it.• Blend it well.

For free distribution73

• Add salt to taste.• Drink it fresh.

Point and say.Lesson 3

sweeperpharmacist

treat

dentistdoctor nurse

I’m a doctor. I treat patients.

For free distribution74

I’m a sweeper. I keep the environment clean.

I’m a nurse. I look after patients.

I’m a pharmacist. I sell medicine.

I’m a dentist. I care for your teeth.

For free distribution75

Look and say.Lesson 4

stomach ache

toothacheheadache

sprainedankle

I have a headache.

I have a stomach ache.

I cut my finger.

For free distribution76

I have a toothache.

I sprained my ankle.

Read the riddles and find answers.

Lesson 5

(grape, banana, milk, carrot, coconut)

I am crunchy.Rabbits like to eat me.I grow in the ground.Who am I?

For free distribution77

I am green or purple.I grow on vines.I come in bunches.Who am I?

I have a brown shell.I am oval.I grow on palm trees.Who am I?

I am yellow and long.I am a fruit.Monkeys eat me.Who am I?

I am white.You can drink me.I come from cows.Who am I?

For free distribution78

Look and say.Lesson 6

• I'm Vitamin A.• I help you to see well. • You can find me in fish, mangoes, eggs, cheese and carrots.

• I'm ..................• to be energetic • meat, brown rice, milk, beans and avocados

For free distribution79

• I'm .....................• to keep your gums healthy • guavas, lemons, papayas, oranges and strawberries

• I'm ..................• to have strong bones and teeth• salmon, cheese, egg yolk, soy milk and cereals

• I'm ...................• to protect yourself against viruses • peanuts, avocados, salmon and bell pepper

For free distribution80

Look and match.Lesson 7

Wash your hands before/after……

1

2

3

4

For free distribution81

5

6

a sneezing or coughingb before eating c touching a woundd playing with petse playing outsidef using the toilet

For free distribution82

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Look and say.Lesson 8

For free distribution83

bell

bread

table

pen

hotel

egg

leg

Ask the students to identify the pictures and name them. Ask them to read the words aloud.

For free distribution84

7

A day at the fair

pumpkin bundle change

Lesson 1Act out.

Senuri is at the Sunday fair with her mother.

For free distribution85

Mother: How much is a kilo of

pumpkin? Vegetable seller: Fifty rupees a kilo.Senuri: Mother, shall we buy some Kohila? They look fresh.Mother: Yes. How much is Kohila?Vegetable seller: Ten rupees a bundle. Mother: A kilo of pumpkin. A bundle of Kohila too, please.Vegetable seller: Anything else, madam?Mother: No, thank you.Vegetable seller: That’ll be sixty rupees.Mother: Here’s hundred rupees.Vegetable Seller: Here’s your change of forty rupees. Thank you, madam.

For free distribution86

Practise with your friend.

How much is ………..?

It’s ………….. rupees.

sixty

seventy

eighty

ninety

one hundred

Count from 1 to 100.

For free distribution87

Students can practise the conversation in groups of three. Get the class to count from 1 to 100 taking turns. Get the students to do lesson 1 in the workbook unit after practising the above lesson.

Let's organise a fair.

Lesson 2

It's / They are ...How much is/ are ...

Make your own money. Have a fair in the classroom.

How much is/are …..?

It’s/They are …………

For free distribution88

stationery

vegetables

fruit

groceries

Group the students and get them to trace paper money and coins. If possible, get them to prepare some items (greetings cards, origami paper creations, etc.) for the fair. Assign the roles of sellers and customers and get them to act out.

For free distribution89

Let's make a pair of scales.

Lesson 3

cut

hang

insert tie

punch

You need:• a clothes hanger• a ball of yarn• 2 paper or plastic cups• a hole punch

For free distribution90

Method:• Cut six long pieces of yarn. • Punch three holes on the sides of each cup.• Insert the yarn through the holes.• Tie the yarn to the cups.• Tie the other ends of the yarn to the hanger.• Hang the pair of scales on a bar or a door knob.Your pair of scales is ready.

For free distribution91

Re-arrange and read aloud.

Lesson 4

Where is

+ verb+ing is/ are.... He/ She/ They is/ are

He/ She/ They

• Where is Dasun and his mother? They are at the pharmacy.• What are they doing? They are buying medicine.

I. i s / w h e r e / M r . Jayasiri/?II. bank/at/he/the/is/.III. is/what/doing/he/there/? IV. depositing /he /some/is/money/.

For free distribution92

I. is/Nizam/where/?ii. bookshop/is/he/the/at/.iii. doing/he/what/is/?iv. buying/he/a/is/story book/.

Help students to read out the questions and answers meaningfully.After the lesson, get the students to attempt lesson 4 in the workbook. Write example sentences on the blackboard. Get the students to pay attention to the capitalization, question mark and full stop before engaging in the workbook activity.

Lesson 5

Read the poster and complete the table.

For free distribution93

"Let's Read"BOOK FAIR

Come and buy your favourite story bookson Saturday, 23rd Septemberfrom 8.00a.m. to 6.00 p.m.at the Public Library

Big Discounts (Buy one and get one free)

Entrance Free

For free distribution94

Name of the book fair:Date:Time:Place:

Use visual clues to get the students to guess what the poster is about. Help them understand key vocabulary(event, date, time, place etc.)After the lesson, get the students to attempt lesson 5 in the workbook.

Let's play "Classroom Shopping". Lesson 6

Students are going to walk around the classroom having shopping conversations with other students and buying objects with money.You’ll need some toy money for this game. Start by telling everyone they must put three of their personal items on the table in the front of the class. Anything will do – pens, books, pencils, rulers etc. Then take out the shopping bags and randomly put the students’ items into the bags, so that each bag has three different items in them. Make sure students don’t see which bags you put their items in. Now, give each student a bag and ask them to look inside their bag. If anyone has any of their own personal items in their bag they must bring them back to the table at the front, and then put them in different student’s bags. The idea is to make sure each student has a bag with three items in, none of which are their own.Tell students that they must find their items and buy them back!Divide the toy money so that everyone has the same amount.

For free distribution95

Read the poem aloud.

Lesson 7

PopcornPop, pop, popcorn,popping in the pot!Pop, pop, popcorn,eat it while it’s hot!Pop, pop, popcorn,butter on the top!When I eat popcorn, I can’t stop! By Helen Moore

Read these words aloud. • pop • pot • hot • top • stop • corn

For free distribution96

Ask the students to think and say more words that rhyme with the above words.

Read aloud.

hop horse not north frog form

Use this poem to introduce short and long ‘o’ sounds. (ɔ and ɔ:)

For free distribution97

FINISH20

19

Say “quack quack” like a duck.

18

photograph

17

question

16

telephone

11

dolphin

12

quick

13

Count from seventy to eighty.

14

trophy

15

quilt

10

quail

9

alphabet

8

quarter

7

Say “forty four.”

6

pharmacy

START12

quill

3

elephant

4queen

5Jump up quickly.

Throw a dice and pronounce the words aloud. Get the students to play the game in groups.

Let's play a game.Lesson 8

For free distribution98

Listening Texts - Workbook Unit 7

Lesson 2

Listen to the announcement and match.

Visit our supermarket today and get big discounts. A bottle of fresh milk is only 60 rupees. A ripe avocado is only 15 rupees. A jar of honey is 100 rupees. Our special chocolates are 85 rupees each. Freshly baked cake is 42 rupees a piece.

Lesson 3

Listen and circle the pictures.

Welcome to “Green Garden” Sunday Fair. All our fruit and vegetables are organic. We don’t add any pesticide to grow them. Today we have special discounts for cucumber and ladies’ fingers. We also have fresh baby bitter gourds. They are very good for your health. Don’t forget to visit our fruit juice stall. Today’s special is mixed fruit juice. Now you can buy fresh milk and yoghurt from our Dairy Corner. Enjoy your visit. Thank you.

For free distribution99

8

Safety first

Lesson 1

Match and read aloud.

climbfurniture tease stairs sharp

Let’s be safe.

A

Don’t climb on furniture.

For free distribution100

B

Don’t tease your pets.

C

Don’t run on stairs.

D

Don’t play with sharp tools.

E

Don’t leave small objects on the floor.

For free distribution101

The teacher can read the text and discuss avoiding accidents at home. Discuss reasons why the students should not do the above mentioned things. E.g. They should not leave small objects on the floor as their little brothers and sisters could put them in their mouths. The students can do the matching activity in groups/pairs depending on the number of students in the class. This activity can also be used for loud reading. Teach vocabulary.

Act out.

Lesson 2

Teacher: Good Morning, children!Students: Good Morning, teacher!Teacher: Where’s Nisal? Is he absent?Senuri: No. He went for sports practices. Oh! Here he is.Dasun : Excuse me teacher, may I come in?Teacher: Of course. Children, do you have sports practices every day?

For free distribution102

Students: Yes, teacher.Teacher: Alright. Drink a lot of water. It’s hot these days. Dasun: Yes. Teacher: Well, best of luck with your events, children. Students: Thank you, teacher.

True or false?1. Nisal went for sports practices.2. Nisal is absent.3. The students have sports practices every day.4. The teacher said “It’s rainy these says.”

Teacher can take the role of the teacher and assign the other roles to groups or to individual students. Familiarize the students with the greetings and wishes used in the conversation.

For free distribution103

Read aloud.

Lesson 3

plenty of water

warm down

knee guards protective gear

warm up

Let's avoid sports injuries• Drink plenty of water.• Do warm up and warm down exercises.• Wear protective gear such as helmets and knee guards.• Do not play when you are not well.• Follow the rules of the game.

Lead a discussion with students to emphasize the importance of these instructions. Explain how not following these instructions can lead to injuries. Stress the value of playing according to the rules and how it can avoid unnecessary problems. Ask them to come up with more instructions. Get the students to do the corresponding workbook activity after this.

For free distribution104

Look and say.

Lesson 4

seat belt

is/am/are + verb + ing

gloves

helmetpads

Safety EverywhereSpeak about these people.

Father is driving the car.He is wearing the seat belt.

sister/riding/bicycle/a helmet

grandmother/gardening/hat/gloves

mother/carrying/hot/ pan/mittens

brother/playing/cricket/a helmet/ gloves/pads

For free distribution105

mittens - worn in the kitchen to protect the wearer’s hand from hot objects.

Emphasize the importance of personal protective equipment (PPE). Help students with difficult vocabulary and the structures. Get the students to speak 1 or 2 sentences in groups.

Let's sing.Lesson 5

Traffic Light SongTune: Where is thumbkin?

Where is red light? Where is red light?Here I am. Here I am. Tell us what you say, sir. Tell us what you say, sir.I say stop! I say stop!

For free distribution106

Where is yellow light? Where is yellow light?Here I am. Here I am.Tell us what you say, sir. Tell us what you say, sir.I say ready! I say ready!

Where is green light? Where is green light?Here I am. Here I am.Tell us what you say, sir.Tell us what you say, sir.I say go! I say go!

Red says stop, yellow says ready,green says go, green says go.These are traffic signals, these are traffic signals,that we know, that we know.

https://www.pinterest.com/pin/507499451734120003

Draw traffic lights and distribute them among students. Get the students to hold them up and imitate actions while they sing.

For free distribution107

Read and match.

Lesson 6

parking

pedestrian crossing

slippery road

Dasun and his father are going to hospital. They are travelling in their three -wheeler.

Dasun: Yes. Look! That’s the sign.

Dasun: Father, why did you stop the three-wheeler?

Father: There’s a .People are waiting to cross the road.

Dasun: Ok. What is that sign?

Father: That sign says . We

must drive carefully.

For free distribution108

Father: That’s right, Dasun. There’s

the sign. Let’s find a place to park.

Dasun: The sign is over

there. We can park under that tree.Father: That’s great!

1. parking2. slippery road ahead3. hospital4. pedestrian crossing5. don’t blow the horn

Read aloud.

Lesson 7

orchids

sort morning

forkfallen

order

For free distribution109

All my orchidsare fallen.Sort and order all the

forks.

Rohan had a fall this morning.

board horn port short force orbit row rock boss rod knob stop hop moss

Use the tongue twisters to teach /ɔ:/ sound. Write a word with /ɔ/ sound on the blackboard and label it 1. Write a word with /ɔ:/sound and label it 2. Read the above words aloud one by one. Get the students to shout 1 or 2 according to the sound.

For free distribution110

Look and find.

Lesson 8

e.g: - There is a tyre.

Ask the students to look at the picture and name things that should be removed to prevent mosquito breeding.

For free distribution111

9

Around the world

Ayubowan, Vanakkam, As-salamu alaykumHello to my friends!

We live in different places around Sri Lanka,we speak in different ways.Greetings are different,we’re children just the same,

Lesson 1Let's sing.

AyubowanVanakkamAs-salamu alaykumHelloBonjourGood dayKonnichi waShalom

For free distribution112

and we all like to sing and play,and we all like to sing and play.

Hello, Bonjour, Ayubowan,good day, Vanakkam, Konnichi waAs-salamu alaykum, Shalom.Hello to my friends around the world.

We live in different placeswe speak in different ways,greetings are different.

We’re children just the same.And we all like to sing and playand we all like to sing and play.

For free distribution113

Adapted from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpTR1wF4M6k

Sing the song and get the students to repeat. Finally get the students to sing in groups with suitable actions.

For free distribution114

Read and find.Lesson 2

This is the planet Earth.There are oceans on Earth.

There are many people in the world.They are different.

This is the map of the world.There are 195 countries in the world.

There are famous places in the world. Taj Mahal is a famous place in India.

These are the flags of different countries.

• The name of our planet.• The number of countries in the world.• A famous place in the world.

For free distribution115

Pre-teach the key words.Discuss the pre-questions before focusing on the text.Then guide the students to read the text.Take them to the library or the computer room to find out more facts about the world.

Read aloud.

Lesson 3

We are fromWe come from

Ayubowan! Vanakkam! We are from Sri Lanka.We are Sri Lankans.

Sri Lanka

Namaste!We come from .......... Indians.

India

I'm from

For free distribution116

Konnichi wa!We come from .......... Japanese.

Japan

Aweh!We are from........ Africans.

Africa

For free distribution117

Hi!I'm from......I'm American.

The United States of America

Hello!We are from............ English.

The United Kingdom

For free distribution118

Act out.

Hello! I’m Mary.I’m from England.

Konnichi wa!I’m Yashumi.I’m from Japan.

Nice to meet you.Nice to meet you too.

Introduce the countries using a globe. Decorate the class with different flags.Get the students to dress up representing different countries. After you introduce the lesson, get them to mingle round the class greeting each other.

For free distribution119

Recite and enjoy.Lesson 4

The SquirrelWhisky. Frisky.Hippity hop.Up he goesto the tree top!Whirly, twirlyround and round.Down he scampersto the ground.Furly. Curly.What a tail.Tall as a feather.Brood as a snail.Where’s his supper?In the shell.Snop. Cracky outfit fell. Annonymous

Get the students to read the poem aloud.

For free distribution120

Read and answer.

Lesson 5

talentswinner

audience dummy puppetsperform

For free distribution121

Say ‘yes’ or ‘no’.• Darci has won many international awards.• She can’t sing.• Her birthday was on 12th October 2004.• She was not shy. • She gives voice to puppets.• She has eight puppets.• Petunia is a singing white rat.

Listen, enjoy and act out.

Lesson 6

It was a Saturday afternoon. Dasun was reading a book about the Mount Everest. “I want to climb the Mount Everest,” he told his mother.

For free distribution122

His brother and sister laughed at him. Next morning, he woke up at six o´clock. He started to pack a bag.He took some clothes out of the cupboard. He went to the kitchen. He took some sweets and a bottle of water.He went to the door. “Where are you going?” his mother asked.“To climb the Mount Everest,” he said.“Alone?”“Yes,” he said.“You´re a brave boy my dear. But you´re only seven.”

For free distribution123

Get the students to act out the above story. Get the students to re-read the story.

Read and think.

How can you make a difference in the world?

Lesson 7

powerful

neighbours

perfect

strong elders

adult

siblings

Do you have to be STRONG to make a difference?

Do you have to be POWERFUL to make a difference?

For free distribution124

Do you have to be BIG to make a difference?

Do you have to be an ADULT

to make a difference?

Do you have to be PERFECT to make a difference?

Do you have to be RICH to make a difference?

For free distribution125

You don't have to do big things to change the world

Be a good friend. Be kind to your

elders, siblings and neighbours. Learn to say 'thank you', 'please' and 'sorry'. Share friendly words with people.

For free distribution126

Read and enjoy.

Lesson 8

For free distribution127

Me and my mom

Bicycle lane

Bicycle station

Bicycle bus

For free distribution128

10

Our future

Lesson 1Listen and find.

neat

glass large

ancient wall

We are in the year 2050.We have a very neat and clean classroom. There are glass walls.There is a glass board. It is a large computer.We don’t have books. We don’t write. We have glass tabs. We type the notes on it.We learn about ancient animals and trees with the tab.

For free distribution129

We like to play games on the wall computers.

Ask the students to match the sentences with the pictures.

For free distribution130

Listen and draw.

Lesson 2

behind

on

under

in next to in front of between

Where is my pen? Where is my pen?

Is it on the table?No!Is it under the desk?No!Is it in the drawer?No!Where is it?It’s behind the curtains!

Where are my shoes? Where are my shoes?

Are they next to the TV?No!Are they in front of the door?No!

For free distribution131

Are they between the sofa and the chair?No!Where are they?They’re on your feet!

https://www.eslkidstuff.com/blog/songs/where-are-my-things

Sing the song with the children. Draw the location of the objects in the poem on the board or get a few students to draw them. Ask them to complete the worksheet given in the workbook lesson 2.

Read and answer.

Lesson 3

zero wasteexchange

sellcompetitions

For free distribution132

Leave NO waste....! Enjoy and learn to be eco- friendly

Enjoy bicycle rides!

Bring your own cup, plate and spoon!

Leave the bins empty!• Workshops What is zero waste?• Demonstrations How to make toothpaste / shampoo at home• Exchange:- clothes, plants, stationery and any reusable material Sell:- Homemade food or garden products• Competitions Poster Competition

For free distribution133

Say ‘yes’ or ‘no’.

• Zero Waste is an eco-friendly

festival.

• You can learn how to make

toothpaste at the festival.

• You can exchange only plants.

• You can’t sell homemade food.

• There are competitions.

• There would be car rides.

• You have to bring a cup from

home.

Help the students to read and answer the questions. Organize a Zero Waste festival in the school. Get more ideas from the following websites.Toothpaste https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xzFuXFOqQBYShampoo https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pv5dEx8UXEs

For free distribution134

Act out.No Electricity!!!

Lesson 4

let'scancan't

Let's use solar power.

1

For free distribution135

23

Work with a partner. Think and say.No water!!!

For free distribution136

Discuss the problems we might face in the future. Let the students act out the given situations. Ask them what would happen if there is no water using the pictures given.

Read aloud. Lesson 5

birdchurchcurtain

nurseperfumepurse

For free distribution137

Read and match.

Lesson 6

munchtraffic robot droplets

Future Fair… By e-technology. Plan your future today..!

10% discount for kids

A

D

B

EF

GH

C

For free distribution138

Ask the students to match the pictures with the phrases.Ask the students which item they like from the list and say why.e.g. I like human robot because it helps me to study.

Let's play a game.

Lesson 7

• Energy droplets ready-to-eat

• Fingertip service to get medicine

• Clock to enjoy the world history

• Flying shoes to travel safe and fast

• Flying cars to avoid traffic

• Human robots to help in studies

• Machine buffaloes to work in the

field

• Safe to munch waterdrops

For free distribution139

Let the students work in groups of three or four. Each group should have a dice and counters. Monitor and guide them whenever needed.

12345

109876

1112131415

2019181716

Ask your friends two questions with What...? How...?

Act 'I'm very happy.'

Tell five 'doing' words.open.....

Introduce yourself .I'm....

Finish..!!You won a ticket to

What are 3Rs?

What is the planet we live in?What are you doing now?

Find the odd one.computer flowertab

Why do we need water?

Name three colours.Tell the days of the week.Count up to 25.

Where is the rabbit?Spell the word.

Tell your friend's name.Name two countries.

Point to a thing that begins with 't'.

Fill in the blank .Meena....... ice cream.

START

Greet your friend.

What is this?Name three things you like to have in the class.

21222324

the Jupiter.25

Recite a poem.

Say the word aloud. women blue you

For free distribution140

Let's sing and make a card.

Lesson 8

It’s time to go home.It’s time to go home.It’s time to go home.It’s time to say good bye.I had so much fun.And I learnt so many things.

For free distribution141

I made so many friends.And I say good bye.Good bye, good bye, dear friends.Good bye, good bye, see you again.

It’s time to go home.It’s time to go home.It’s time to go home.It’s time to say good bye.I had so much fun.And I learnt so many things.I made so many friends.And I say good bye.Good bye, good bye, dear friends.Good bye, good bye, see you again.

Each student should have a piece of 15cm x 10 cm Bristol board and colours.Get them to draw a picture. Ask the students to write ‘Good Bye’ / From… / To…..on the card. Get the students to display the card on the board.Sing the song with the students. Finally ask the students to take their cards and give it to a friend.

Adapted from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0LDArAJf7-c