==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

CIVIC EDUCATION

Grade 6

Educational Publications Department

To obtain textbooks in electronic mediumwww.edupub.gov.lk

ii

First Print - 2014Second Print - 2015Third Print - 2016Forth Print - 2017Fifth Print - 2018Sixth Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978 - 955 - 25 - 0084 - 8

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by S&S Printers (Pvt) Ltd.No. 49, Jayantha Weerasekara Mawatha, Colombo 10.

iii

iv

v

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam Minister of Education

vi

Foreword The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.\

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha WickramanayakaCommissioner General of Educational PublicationsEducational Publications DepartmentIsurupayaBattaramulla.10-04-2019

vii

Monitoring and Supervision W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka - Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications Department

Direction W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications DepartmentCo-ordination Dakshina Kasturiarachchi - Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications DepartmentEditor Board

Vishaka Sooriyabandara - Senior Lecturer, University of Sri Jayewardenepura A.H.T. Thakshila Jayamini - Vice President, Ruhuna National College of Education

S.V.Y. Kumari De Silva - Senior Lecturer, National Institute of Education

R.M.P.A. Gunathilaka - Senior Lecturer, Siyana National Institute of Education,

Palitha Aravinda Virakkodi - Assistant Commissioner,

Educational Publications Department

Writer Board

C.S.Jayasinha - Manager of Teacher Center - Horana

Anoma Karunarathna - In Service Advisor, Zonal Education Office - Colombo

M.K. Kingsli Priyantha - Senior Lecturer, College of Education College of Education

J.M.M. Jayasundara - Teachers’ Service

K.D.D. Percival - Retired Senior Lecturer, National Institute of Education.

P.N. Nimesha Dilshni Dayarathne - Assistant Lecturer, University of Kelaniya Illustrations and Cover PageD. H. Mithila Udara - IT Unit Educational Publications Department

Technical AssistanceA. Asha Amali Weerarathna - IT Unit Educational Publications Department

Dakshina Kasturiarachchi - Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications Department

viii

Index

A Good Citizen 61 - 91

Our School 01 - 39

The Region We Live in 40 - 60

ix

1

for free distribution

01

Our School

Introduction

Apart from home, the environment that is most familiar to us is our school. The school performs an immense service in moulding us into good citizens possessing intelligence, quality and merit. The school is an institution that contributes not only to the development of the individual but also to the development of society. How much has the school influenced us in providing the competencies and skills necessary to contribute to the development of society as an active member? That is why we honour and respect the school since it produces a successful person to society. By studying this chapter you will get the opportunity to develop the necessary skills to identify your school, and work as an active, commendable member of society.

Fig 1.1

2

for free distribution

Let us identify the school1.1 History of our SchoolYour family, your village and you have a history. Similarly, your school too has a history. History, is the study of past events, particularly in human affairs.

What is meant by the history of a school is the study of its development from the day it was started up to the present day.

"The source" is the common name that helps us to identify all the things in history.Given below are several sources that help you find information about the history of your school. ³ Plaques placed at various locations in the school ³ Old documents, pictures, and photographs in the city or village library ³ Retired principals and teachers ³ Documents maintained in the school (log-books, student admission registers, mark books, census reports) ³ Chiefs of places of religious worship ³ Past students

The students of Grade 6 discussed to seek information regarding their school. For this purpose present students decided to invite the first student admitted to the school to get information from him or her. With the help of the teacher the students met the school principal to get information about the history of their school. They wanted to get particulars about the first student admitted to the school. The principal gave them the opportunity to examine the old admission register of the school. This is what had been entered in it about the first student to be admitted to the school.

Admission Number 01

Date of admission

1935.01.09

Name of student

M.A. Appuhamy

Date of birth

1930.01.30

3

for free distribution

The subject teacher was able to bring eighty year old Mr. M.A. Appuhamy to the school, with the help of the past students of the school and parents. Mr. Appuhamy who came to the school on the invitation of the teacher was received by the students with a sheaf of betel.

Fig 1.2

The principal introduced the visitor amidst the applause of the students. After receiving Mr. Appuhamy, the subject teacher explained what the students wanted to know about the history of the school. Mr. Appuhamy revealed to the students details regarding the past of the school, in an interesting manner. ''My dear sons, daughters, I felt very happy when I came to this place. I remembered the day when I, as a child like you, was admitted to this school. As my parents told me, this school had been started in 1935 as a government school. That was for the children of the village who found it difficult to go to the school in the city. Those days, there were only two schools in the city. One was a missionary school. The other was a Buddhist school. There were not many families in the village. There were only about twenty families residing here. Most of the people in the village were farmers by occupation. There were potters also. My father was a businessman.There were carters and chena cultivators. There were also children who did not attend school, in the village. The children of the rich people of the village went to the schools in the city. But it was not that easy to go to the city as now. It took quite a long time to get to the city along the gravel road, by buggy cart. Most people walked to the city. This school was first started by Mr. M.A. Bandara, on a small block of land at the end of the bazaar that belonged to my father. It was a small cadjan thatched, wattle and daub room. The teacher was Mr. Sekara Vidanarachchi. After leaving a little space for the staff room, the rest was used for the school. I was the first student to be admitted. Afterwards, about fourteen students were admitted to the school, from time to time. The small building in the distance was where the school was located at first.

4

for free distribution

''Studying along with me in the same class were Pelis, Shanmugam, Dingiri Banda, Uma, Piyasena and Cader. Later, various philanthropists donated lands and buildings. We got desks and chairs. Till then, we studied sitting on long benches. Later, more children came and the number of teachers increased. Later, our school was made a Central College. It was only after that we got large buildings, laboratory and other facilities. ''Not only children of the village, clever children from neighbouring areas too came to this school for further education. I too entered university. The school produced academics and professionals who rendered an effective service to the country. On completion of my university education, I was appointed to this same school as a teacher.'' ''On the first day, I assumed duties, the principal introduced me at the morning assembly as a brilliant student of this school. Later, I became the principal of the school. The school today is more developed than it was at our time. It will improve further in future. My request to all of you is to be one like me, who can speak with pride about your school" saying this Mr. Appuhamy concluded his speech. All the students applauded with pleasure. On the following day, during the Citizenship Education period the students discussed with the teacher what they had learned from Mr. Appuhamy. The teacher's view was that further information could be gathered from the documents available in the school. The documents were examined, with the permission of the principal. Much of the facts available were correct. The students felt really proud of their school.

Activity 1

1. Your school too has a history as the above school. Based on the sources that helped you to find the history of your school, answer the following questions.(i) What reason initiated to start your school?(ii) When was your school started?(iii) Name the pioneers who strated the school.

5

for free distribution

02. Complete the table below in relation to your school.

At the beginning At PresentName of your school Land areaName of principalNumber of buildingsNumber of staff membersNumber of students

03. i Write the names of brilliant students produced by your school and the fields where they excelled. ii Select one of them and write an article to the notice board appreciating the service rendered by him/her. 04. Having identified the sources that can be used to learn history, prepare an article for the wall paper regarding the history of your school.1.2Let us inquire on the organizational structure of the schoolThe organizational structure of the school is the manner in which the administration and the developmental affairs of the school are organized. This organizational structure may change according to the number of students and the teachers in the school. In your school too, there is an organizational structure.Rough plan of a school organizational structure

Students Class Monitors Prefects Teachers - in - charge of Grades Deputy Principal Past Students Principal School Development Committee

6

for free distribution

Activity 2

1. Answer the following questions based on school organizational structure.(i). What is the main designation related to the administration of the school? (ii).Why is an administrative structure necessary for a school? Write 02 reasons.

2. Prepare a chart showing the administrative structure of your school.The different roles of the school administrative structure

Student

Non - Academic Staff

Teachers

Prefects

Principal

Deputy / Assistant

Principal Sectional

Head

Diagram 1.1Responsibilities and duties of the members of school (Role of the principal) ²Act as the head of the school and pilot of educational activities. ²Admission of students, their assignment into classes and assignment of teachers. ²Preparation of time tables and organization of classroom teaching activities. ²Launching of activities related to the development and welfare of the staff.

²Implementation of the curriculum and its development.

² Supervision of teaching.

² Evaluation of teachers.

² Supervision of students' evaluation and discipline

7

for free distribution

²As the Head of the school ³Implementation of the rules and regulations of the ministry and being responsible to the ministry about them. ³Uplift the level of the school keeping close relationships with parents, past students, external community and institutions. ³Acquisition of equipment and sports material necessary for the school and providing the space for their use. ²Teachers ³Inculcating decipline and decorum ³Provide proper guidance to students for character development. ³Co - operation with all members of the school society and functioning with commitment. ³Development of knowledge, attitudes and skills relevant to the subject. ³Working in conformity with accepted norms, regulations and values. ³Contributing to the educational and physical development of the school. ³Conducting school term tests and submitting marks. ³Implementing School Based Assessments. ³Maintaining a pleasant environment within the classroom. ³Treating all students equally. ³Involving students in good acts and introducing them to society. ²Non-academic staff ³Assisting the principal and the staff to implement school activities. ³Assisting in the provision of facilities to the students for their educational activities.

8

for free distribution

³Assisting in the maintenance of cleanliness and beauty of the school garden. ³Assisting security activities. ³Maintaining goodwill with students. ²Students ³Attending school daily. ³Diligent involvement in studies. ³Respecting the principal and the staff. ³Co-operating and maintaining cordial relations with other students of the school. ³Behave to safeguard the dignity of the school. ³Safeguard rules, regulations and.traditions and maintain discipline of the school. ³Safeguarding the resources of school. ³Assisting the systematic maintenance and cleanliness of the school environment. When the duties and responsibilities mentioned above are fulfilled by individuals, it will greatly help raise the quality and the development of the school.

Activity 3

Meet three of the following and write three functions assigned to each of them.I. Principal or Deputy Principal II. Sectional HeadIII. Class TeachersIV. Prefects

Activity 4

1) Based on the diagram below, name the various organizations in the structure of your school.2) Give three functions performed by each of them.

9

for free distribution

School Development Committee

Sports CommitteeWelfareCommittee

Board of Prefects

Environmental CommitteeReligiousCommittee

DisciplineCommittee

ScoutingCommittee

Other

Other roles within the school structure

Diagram 1.21.3. I myself enquire information regarding me

As a student of the school, the facts given in the diagram will help you to identify your self correctly.

Obstacles and challenges I face in life

My skills

My Weaknesses

Good characteristics I possess

My personal information (one’s identity)

1.3.1. WHO AM I?Every citizen has an identity. In order to recognize your identity as a student, answer the questions below.

Diagram 1.3

10

for free distribution

Activity 5

(1) Your full name :................................ Your age :................................ Your address :................................ Date of admission to school :................................Admission number given to you :...............................

(2) To confirm the accuracy of information, mark " " in the box given.

1. The way you confirmed the correctness of your full name.

Father Mother Guardian Class teacher Birth certificate

2. The way you confirmed the correctness of your age

Father Mother Guardian Birth certificate Class teacher A family member/relation Counting

3. The way you confirmed the correctness of your address

Father Mother Family members School From the electoral register Grama Niladari

4. The way you confirmed the correctness of your date of admission

Father Mother Guardian Attendance register Class teacher Attendance register

11

for free distribution

5. The way you confirmed the correctness of your admission number

Class teacher Admission register Attendance register

Activity 6

1) Enter your personal information and complete the given bio-data.

Bio-data1. Name with initials :...............................................2. Data of birth :...............................................3. Age on January 1st this year :............................................... Years Months Days 4. Private address :...............................................5. Telephone No. (If available) :...............................................6. Name and address of informant in an emergency :............................................... (His/her phone No. if available)7. Name of your school :......................................8. Address of your school :......................................9. School telephone number :......................................10. Date of admission to school :......................................11. Distance to your residence from school :...................................... ....................................Date ..................................................Signature

You are an extra special individual. No one on earth is equal to you. You should be your own self. That is your identity.

12

for free distribution

One's good qualities

Sewwandi, a grade 6 student of Nelum class of Wewegama Junior school, wrote down her good qualities as follows.

Respect others

Kind

Truthful

Honest

Happy

Disciplined

Simple

Patience

The Good Qualities I Possess

Diagram 1.4

Activity 71. Identify good qualities you possess as shown above and write them.

2. Write the instances you really exhibited your good qualities mentioned above.eg :- Truthfulness: Telling the teacher, the true reason for getting late to school.Showing one's skills

Fig 1.3 - An instance to show learning as a skill

Fig 1.4 - A boy wining the high-jump event at a Provincial Sports meet

13

for free distribution

Fig 1.6 - A group of students preparing cool drinks to serve at a primary school sportsmeet.

Fig 1.5 - A group of students exhibiting their aesthetic abilities.

Fig 1.7 - Grade 6 students helping small students in the primary school sportsmeet

Activity 8Create an exhibit to show your talents using left overs, clay or young cadjan leaves.

Think of the points below in order to identify the talents you possess.

1. What are the talents you have displayed?2. What are the instances where you had been a winner?3. What are the creations you have made?4. Have you identified the talents of others?5. What are the words you used to show your appreciation of those talents?6. What are the abilities others feel you possess?7. For which talent of yours do others praise you?8. What did you feel when others praised you?

14

for free distribution

Focus your attention on the life story of a great Sri Lankan who utilized his talents in his childhood, to conquer life.Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara

Fig 1.8

Christopher William Wijekoon Kannangara was born on the 13th of October 1884 in the village of Randomba situated between Balapitiya and Ambalangoda. He lost his mother, at the age of six, but his step-mother treated him well. Showing many talents in his childhood, he got his primary education from Randombe Wesley Missionary School. At a prize giving of the school, little Kannangara received many prizes from the chief guest, Rev. J. H. Darel, the principal of Richmond College. When C.W.W. Kannangara was 14 years old he won a scholarship to Richmond College. He received free board and lodging with facilities for education. Being quite satisfied with these facilities he focused his attention completely on studies, utilizing the facilities to the maximum. He never expected special privileges. It might have been because of the tough experiences that he had to face during his schooling that made up his mind to bring relief to the under privileged children of Sri Lanka. Being a very clever student, he scored the highest marks in Mathematics at the Cambridge Senior Examination of 1903. He was the leader of the school cricket team and a member of the football team. He was famous as a talented debater and an actor at school. He served as a teacher at the Richmond college. Serving as a teacher at Prince of Wales College, Moratuwa and Wesley College, he studied law. He joined the legal profession in 1910. While practising as a lawyer he was involved in social work and politics. In 1923 he became a member of the State Council representing the Galle District. In 1931 C.W.W.Kannangara was reelected as a member of the State Legislative Council and he was the president of Sri Lanka Jathika Sangamaya as well.

15

for free distribution

He was the president of the executive committee on education of the state council and became the first Minister of Education in 1931. He was the pioneer of free education in Sri Lanka. C.W.W. Kannangara paved the path to all children to obtain free education from primary to university level while establishing Central Colleges and vernacular education system in Sri Lanka. Thus, C.W.W. Kannangara performed a dedicated service for the betterment of Sri Lankan education. As gratitude to his devoted service he was called the Father of Free Education of Sri Lanka.

Diagram 1.5

One's own life experience

Life experiences others possess From within the family or through social groups one represents

By participating oneself with various training programs implemenated in society.

Through the use of electronic media,(Video clips, internet, TV Programs, RadioProgrammes

Obtaining knowledge and experiences ofveterans in various fields of skill

Newspapers

Observing the experiences of others andacting creatively Refering to and the study of books andwritings relevant to one's field of abilities

Methodologies that can be utilized for the development of the abilities and talentsthat individuals possess

Activity 9

1.Collect information on several local as well as foreign individuals who made life successful through their talents and with the help of the teacher complete the grid below by writing the fields in which they exhibited their talents.

16

for free distribution

NameField in which talent was exhibited Talent

12345672. Prepare a booklet containing information on the life of one of the individuals above.

3. Write your talents as a student.

4. Present to the class information on a skill of a particular friend that you appreciate. Have you identified your own talents? What should you do to develop these talents@ ³Identify what you can and what you like to do for doing it better. ³Display your talent where and when appropriate and thereby build self-confidence in you. ³Understand that your talents are important for the progress of society and improving them. ³Realize that you can get the maximum use of your skills through the awareness of the nature of life and connect them with your own skills.

By excluding the things that are difficult for you or those you do not like, you can build up the aims of your life according to your talents and abilities

One's Weaknesses

Here are some weaknesses written down on the blackboard by the students of grade 6 '' Araliya'' class.

17

for free distribution

SuspicionHarassing others

Teasing friends

The story of a child who made a habit of telling liesIn a certain village there was a child who herded cattle. This boy who made telling lies a habit took his herd to a lawn in the middle of a forest for grazing. One day he began to scream....."Oh the tiger is here, please save me." Some people who were cutting firewood in the forest, ran to the place where the child was screaming. Then the boy stopped screaming and laugh sarcastically, He said, "Oh! You got fooled, hoo, hoo, you got fooled!"A few days later, this child began to scream as on the previous day from the middle of the forest," screaming the tiger is here, please save me!... That day too the people who heard him came running and realized that they had been fooled once again. They felt ashamed. On another day, when this boy was grazing the cattle a tiger actually came towards him, growling.The child continued to scream....." the tiger has come, .....oh save me." Although the men who had come to the forest heard this cry they did not pay much heed nor did they go towards where the cry came from. Next day the people of the village came to know that the boy who went to herd the cattle had actually been attacked by the tiger.The one who tells lies cannot be believed even when he is telling the truth.

As shown above, you too may have weaknesses. You, yourself must identify your weaknesses before others point them out to you.

18

for free distribution

Actions to be taken to minimize one's weaknesses ³Identification of own weaknesses ³Be humble enough to accept one's weaknesses when others point them out to you. ³Determine to minimize one's weaknesses as much as possible. ³Take action to see that the identified weaknesses do not re-occur again.

Activity 10

1. Complete the following grid with the guidance of your teacher.

One's own weaknesses Action that may be taken to minimize them.12345

2' Write out the disadvantages you faced because of these weaknesses. Obstacles and Challenges you face

As a student, you may have faced challenges when involved in your educational activities. These may be various challenges such as economic difficulties, failure of others to respect your identity, failure to get leadership, failure of others to accept you, pressure from rebellious students etc.Every individual has to face challenges in life. You should believe that every challenge can be converted to strength that promotes success in life. Individuals who overcome challenges have become successful individuals, in the world.

19

for free distribution

Let us focus attention on information regarding an individual who faced challenges and conquered life.

Fig 1.9

Senaka Bibile, born on the 13th of February 1920 A.D. made Kathaluwa Ahangama in the district of Galle, his home.

He, who entered Trinity College, Kandy for his basic education faced a childhood full of wants and needs. On completing primary and secondary education he entered the medical faculty of the Colombo University.

Being an extremely clever student he won the gold medal for medicine and gold medal for surgery, a rare achievement for a student. In 1954 he became the head of the pharmacology department setup for the first time at the faculty of medicine. He was the first professor of pharmacology.

His main objective in life was to offer low - price pharmaceuticals to patients. In order to achieve this objective he became the founder of the State Osusala. His policy was to import the pharmaceuticals with the help the government and distribute them through the State Osusala. He emphasized the importance of using the original name of the drug instead of its commercial name. The drug policy he introduced was highly recognized and appreciated by the World Health Organization.

During the latter part of his life, while on a trip to popularize his principle of providing essential drugs to patients at affordable rates in third world countries, he passed away in Ghana.

20

for free distribution

Activity 11

1. Identify the obstacles/challenges, you face. Write out what kind of action you would take to overcome them.

2. Considering the example given below, complete the following table.

Challenges you faced How you faced themIts outcome

To you To the members of your family

To your school

e.g: Failure to become class monitor

Inculcating leadership qualities

Developing self confidencein you

Be proud of yourselfBe diligent to be a student with real leadership qualities

You should know that there are different ways to face the challenges and should understand to follow them.

Opportunities provided by the school for one's development

Knowledge, attitudes, skills and habits you acquire in school are of immense help to exist as a good citizen. The school provides you with subject knowledge and awareness. Similarly, while providing you with opportunities where such talents can be exhibited, it trains co-existance.

21

for free distribution

Opportunities provided by the school for your development.

Fig 1.11 Involvement in classroom learning

Involvement in a Shramadana campaignFig 1.10

Fig 1.13A felicitation ceremony for teachers

Fig 1.12

Engaging in free activities under teacher guidence

Activity 12

Answer the questions below based on the pictures given above. (Get the assistance of the subject teacher for this purpose.)

i. What are the advantages you get as a student by participating in the above functions? ii. Write an article to a wall newspaper about the contribution made by your school for the development of your character as a student.

iii. On the topic "The school is like a mother protecting us", write a few verses or an article to the school magazine.

22

for free distribution

As a student you should have noble objectives for your success in life. It is very important that these objectives are good and fruitful. Inculcation of wholesome aims contributes not only for you but for the social progress as well. What types of wholesome aims should you possess for the success of your life as a Grade 6 student?

³Obtaining over 80 marks in each subject. ³Cultivation of leadership skills. ³Getting the opportunity to participate in sports on behalf of your school. ³Development of the ability to use second languages in addition to mother tongue. ³Development of the ability to use the computer.

If it is difficult to achieve these goals, alternate paths should be used where necessary. When one path is closed, another path will open for you. What you should do is to be vigilant in that regard. Sometimes, when pursuing goals, we may encounter challenges or make mistakes. In order to face such situations it is necessary that, we develop qualities such as self-confidence, will power, interest, commitment, as an interest in minimizing our weaknesses.

Actions that can be taken to achieve your goals

² Read supplementary books related to subjects.

² Watch educational programmes.

² Proper use of textbooks.

² Exchange knowledge and experience.

² Improve inborn talents by engaging in sports and co-curricular activities.

23

for free distribution

1.4 Let us work to a planPlanning is essential for life. Planning is the implementation of segments of tasks within a time-frame in order to carry out the task more effectively. Learning to perform one's tasks orderly and systematically, is very important for a student both at home and school. What can be done to getting up in the morning and going to school at the proper time? e.g - Before going to bed, arrange the books according to the time table, keep the school uniforms ready and get up early.

Reduce mental stress

Develop self confidence

Advantages derived through planning and organization

Ensure happiness

Facilitate task

Save time

Minimize problems

Use resources frugally

Realize objectives

Diagram 1.6

Activity 13

1. Prepare a timetable of your daily tasks which help you as a student to get the maximum use of time available.Given below are the characteristics of a student who is systematic and those of a student who is unsystematic.

Systematic Unsystematic

Works systematicallyNeglects essential stepsMakes maximum use of timeHabitually lateAchieves one's goalsPossibilities for regretFree from mental stressWorks under mental stressWins challenges easilyDifficult to face challenges

24

for free distribution

Assisting planning and implementing of cleanliness of the school and classroom.

Given below are some points which you should pay attention to. Prepare a program that can be carried out in order to keep the classroom tidy and orderly. ³Survey of the material available for use in the classroom. ³Identify and make a list of shortages. ³Collect suggestions to maintain proper cleanliness and order. ³Prioritize suggestions. ³Programme and implement the suggestions.

Activity 14

Taking the above points into consideration, prepare a program to be implemented in order to maintain the front area of Grade 6 classroom in a pleasant manner.

By working according to a plan, on various occasions, in the school or in the classroom, that task can be performed with greater success and minimum oversights.

Form into several groups, select one of the topics given below and prepare a suitable plan.

² At a sportsmeet ² At a felicitation ceremony for teachers

² At a prize-giving ² Children's Day commemoration ² At a concert School CultureThe rules and regulations, traditions, customs and emblem representing the school are part of the school culture.

25

for free distribution

³ To build a good learning environment in the school. ³ To administer the school systematically. ³ To make disciplined students.³ To safeguard the rights of the school community properly.³ To safeguard the identity of the school.

Reasons for the need of rules and regulations to a school

When taking the above into consideration, you will realize that the rules in the school are there for your own benefit.

In order to conform well the rules of the schools, you have to master them. Loyalty will safeguard your dignity. As a student you are entitled to numerous rights. To enjoy the rights properly and to perform your duties with that regard safeguarding the rights of your fellow student, you are to adhere to the rules and regulations of the school. If you are law-abiding it contributes to the well-being of the school.

A few rules and regulations of the school regarding

students ² Attend school regularly. ² Arrive at school in time.² Dress in the school uniform. ² Stay in school during school hours. ² Follow the time table during studies.² Be obedient to the principal and teachers and respect them.² Be obedient to leadership. ² Safeguard the traditions of the school.Traditions observed in the schoolCustoms and conventions that have existed in the school systems for a long time are considered traditions. Traditions, rules and regulations in the school are very important. Therefore, you should be aware of the traditions that are followed in the school. You should be familiar with these traditions. There are traditions unique to your school followed at the morning assembly and at the end of session.

26

for free distribution

There are traditions observed from a long time on the tailoring of the school uniform. At school prize giving, at inter-house sportsmeets, there are traditions unique to each school. Discuss with your subject teacher, and understand the traditions that are followed in your school.

Importance of safeguarding traditions ² Building discipline in students. ² Producing a group endowed with self respect. ² Safeguarding the identity of the school. ² Handing them over to the future generation of students.

Activity 15

² Write down two rules and regulations and two traditions of your school. ² Prepare a code of rules suitable for your class. Emblems representing the identity of the school

Motto

The motto of the school is designed as an example in moulding the lives of students.Discuss the meaning of your school motto. Make your school motto an example for your life. It will serve you to make your future a success.

Activity 16

²Write out the motto of your school. ²Explain its meaning in brief.

School Crest

The school crest is important as a symbol representing the identity of the school.

27

for free distribution

S

h

a

r

e

a

n

d

c

a

r

e

V

id

ya

N

i

k

e

t

h

a

n

a

V

i

d

y

al

a

ya

Symbols and colours are used for the school crest. Symbols like the oil lamp, the sun are included in most school crests.Pay attention to the colours and symbols in your school crest. Discuss them with your teacher.

Situations where the school crest is used

² School uniform ² Stationery of the school ² Books and publications of the school ² To imply the ownership of the school ²To denote the identity of the school

Activity 17

²Produce a model of your school crest using material easily available to you. ²Explain what the colours and symbols in it stand for.

²Trace instances where the crest of your school had been used.

School Flag

V

i

d

y

a

N

i

k

e

t

h

a

n

a

V

i

d

y

a

la

y

a

The school flag is another symbol that represents the identity of your school. The school flag comprises of various coloursand symbols. You may have seen that certain school flags are designed including the school crest and motto.

The colours and symbols in a school flag have been used in order to represent various ideas. Inquire from your teacher what the colours and symbols in the flag of your school represent.

Fig 1.14

28

for free distribution

Situations when the school flag is used. ² At the morning assembly of the school. ² At the inter-house sportsmeet. ² At other functions held in the school.The way to postures when the school flag is raised. ² One should face the flag standing at attention. ² Raise the school flag with dignity. ² Everybody should join in singing the school anthem.

As the school flag is a symbol representing your school, it should always be the focus of your respect.

Activity 18

² Draw your school flag. ² Name the colours and symbols in it and describe in short what they represent.

School Anthem

Every school has a school anthem. It is a symbol that denotes the identity of the school.The mission of the school anthem

² Generate views in the minds of students regarding the service rendered to the nation by the school. ² Develop respect, pride and love for the school. ² Depict the identity of the school.

Recall your school anthem and its meaning. In most school anthems it can be noticed that the school is addressed as '' Mother ''.

Instances where the school Anthem is sung

² Commencement of school. ² On special functions of the school. ² At inter-house sportsmeets.Recall instances where the school anthem is sung in your school.

29

for free distribution

The way and the posture to sing the school anthem ² Singing the school anthem to the tune. ² Singing the school anthem in a manner to show pride and respect. ² Standing at attention. ² Not to be involved in any other task when singing the school anthem. Train yourself to sing the school anthem to tune, standing at attention.

Activity 19 ² Write the meaning of your school anthem, in simple language. ² Quote the words in your school anthem that imply good qualities like unity, service rendered by the school to society. ² Collect the anthems of two of your neighboring schools and discuss their meanings with the help of your teacher.Vision of the school

Given below is the vision of a school. Read it well. Try to understand its meaning.

Vision of our school

Gifting to society a set of students, endowed with wisdom and abilities.

Discuss with your teacher the ''Vision'' of your school and try to understand its meaning.

You will realize that the ''Vision'' expresses its aims it proposes to achieve in the future.When you complete your education well and enter society as a good citizen, the ''Vision'' of the school is achieved.

Mission Statement

Consult your teacher and find out where the mission statement of your school is displayed. Read the mission statement well and note it down in your exercise book. Get the help of your teacher for its meaning.

30

for free distribution

It is you, students who receive the service of the school. The mission performed by your school for you is expressed in the mission.When that mission is successful, the ability to gift good citizens to the country is achieved.The service rendered by the school to society is immense. Given below is a statement highlighting its value and importance.'' The opening of a single school results in closing one prison''This expression states that the school gifts good citizens to society.

Activity 20

² Extract the vision of your school according to the instructions of your teacher and note it in your exercise book. Inquire about its meaning.

² Inquire from a friend of yours studying in another school about the ''Vision'' of that school and note it down in your exercise book.Inquire about the meaning.

School Uniform

The school uniform is very important because it represents the culture of the school. A uniform is used by all students in schools. Every year the government provides material free to students for their uniforms.

Each school has a uniform specific to it. And also, it helps represent the identity of that school.

Tailoring of the uniform according to proper standards is not only the identity of the school but it is also the law. Similarly, it not only represents the identity of the school but also displays an appearance of uniformity among students.

What the uniform expresses is the identity of your school. Therefore, once you are dressed in the uniform of your school, you have to safeguard its honour.

31

for free distribution

Activity 21 ² Draw a picture of your school uniform. 1.6 Let us do our duties and accept our responsibilities while enjoying our rights As a member of the school community, everybody in the school takes action to ensure that you get the rights below. These are your rights as a member of the school. ² The right to education. ² The right for the development of one's talents. ² The right to security. ² The right to equality. ² The right to express one's ideas. ² The right to associate with one's peers in school. ² The right to safeguard one's identity. As a student you have the right to be provided with all facilities necessary to carry out your educational activities. The government provides additional things to safeguard your rights and for the development of your abilities. Here are some examples. ² Provision of free education. ² Provision of free school textbooks. ² Provision of free uniform material. ² Provision of laboratory facilities. ² Provision of sports materials. ² Provision of library facilities. ² Provision of computer facilities. ² Provision of language labs. While enjoying your rights, you should pay attention to meeting your responsibilities. Meeting your responsibilities in this manner results in further confirmation of your rights. Education is a right of yours. Being properly involved in your educational activities, being disciplined, being law-abiding, working on par with other students, are your duties. Similarly, acting so as to

32

for free distribution

safeguard the rights of other students, is one of your duties. Prevention of your friends from involvement in undesirable activities is not only your duty but also your responsibility. Similarly you are expected to protect the school properties as it is your duty. Being obedient to teachers and respecting them are responsibilities of yours. While you have the right to security within the school, it is your duty to safeguard that rights of other students. Contributing to the protection of the environment you live in is a duty of yours. You should take interest in keeping your classroom clean and tidy. Similarly, you should contribute to the maintenance of a clean school environment.The school community is a diverse community. The school society is made up of students of various age levels. There are students who are older than you as well as students who are younger than you studying in your school.Similarly, there will be students who belong to different ethnic groups studying there. There could be students of various religions studying. It is most important that you consider them as children of the same mother and treat everybody with a sense of brotherhood.In spite all such diversities, all the members of the school community are entitled to equal rights. Acting in a manner that safeguards the rights of everyone is a duty you have to carry out.

Activity 22 ² Complete the table below with the guidance of your teacher. (An example of a duty related to a right has been provided.)

Your rights as a student Duties related to these rightsPresenting one's viewsRespecting the views of others.Receiving education .......................................Being secure in school .......................................Improving one's abilities.......................................

33

for free distribution

1.7 Implementing duties between teachers and students The existence of cordial relations between teachers and students greatly influences the success of the education of students. Your commitment in the implementation of your duties by your teachers contributes to the maintenance of teacher-pupil relations at a level of excellence.Your duties by your teachers ³Involvement in your studies with commitment. ³Helping and supporting when and where necessary. ³Accepting the advice and instructions of your teachers and acting accordingly. ³Behaving decently. ³Respecting and being obedient to the teacher.Duties and responsibilities of teachers by their students

Functioning with commitment to provide you with a good education is the most important responsibility of your teachers by you.

Making all of you good, virtuous students is the duty and responsibility of teachers. For this purpose, your teachers would be giving you a lot of advice. The objective here is the development of the skills necessary to spend a wholesome and good social life in the future. Your teachers will also take action to ensure your security and safety. Your conformity to such action will ensure your safety and security.

Similarly, your teachers will take action to provide you with guidance and advice in the solution of the problems you face in your day to day life.

It is possible that in your pursuit of activities related to your education you have to face certain problems. Similarly, even in the pursuit of your day to day activities in life, there can arise situations that are problematic. Even in such situations, your teachers will provide you with guidance and advice on how to face them and overcome them.

34

for free distribution

It is your teachers who spot out your talents and make a tremendous effort to sharpen them for you and introduce you to society. Therefore, it is your duty to determine to safeguard the honour and dignity of your teachers, avail yourself of their services and become an effective individual for your country. The responsibilities of students by their peers in school

As a member of the school community, you should pay attention to perform your duties and responsibilities by your peers in school.

Co - operation, equal consideration for the others, engaging in good deeds, helping in need, caring for the younger students and maintaining good behaviour as a model for them are your main responsibilities.

Activity 23

² List the duties that you have to carry out for your teachers. ² Make a list of responsibilities you owe to your colleagues.1.8. The bond between the school and society

The school is considered an essential institution that takes action to satisfy the needs anticipated by society.

Various relationships that exist between the school and society

Diagram 1.7

35

for free distribution

There are various groups of people and organizations that maintain good relations with the school. The school maintains good relationship in numerous ways with these groups. The diagram above contains such relationships. When mutual relations are maintained between the school and society, service is rendered by society to the school and by the school to society

³Producing good citizens ³Improving literacy of the public ³Training of future leaders ³Providing education to children and guiding them to lead a good life ³Transforming children into law-abiding individuals ³Exhibiting children's talents ³Giving messages to the community ³Providing resources in the school for the needs of society

The messages conveyed to the neighbouring community by the school

Importance of sending children to school

Learning to observe health habits

Observing good habits

Importance of proper nutrition

Importance of safeguarding the environment

Diagram 1.8

Services rendered by society to the school ³Assisting in the development activities of the school. ³Safeguarding the property of the school. ³Getting the services provided by the neighbouring organizations.

36

for free distribution

³Participating in the various festivals of the school. ³Taking action to have the cultural heritage and social values introduced to the school curriculum. ³Educating the school on good hygienic methods and modern technological techniques. Let us learn about ways in which the school maintains relations with the community

Action is being taken, under the ongoing school development programs to get the other people associated with the school to join the internal staff for the development of the school.Their goals are as below: ³Provide a good education to all ³Inculcate the positive feeling of ''School is ours'' among the students, teachers, principal and the community. ³Optimum use of resources. ³Identify the particular needs of every student. ³Ensure flexibility of the activities of the school

(School Development and Management Committees have been appointed to achieve these goals.)School Development Committee

This committee comprises, the representatives of past students, parents, academic staff and a representative of the zonal education office. The principal is the presiding member of the committee

The objective of this committee is to develop the school through receiving and using necessary resources. This provides opportunities to build up relationships between the school and the community and share the experience among all. The issues prevailing are resolved by self - motivation and self-direction by all.Past student’s society and well-wishersIt is essential for the development of a school that it maintains constant relations with its past students. Through this, close relationship

37

for free distribution

is developed between the principal, staff and the present students. Past students can be useful to the school in numerous ways like in obtaining school buildings and equipment, provision of mid-day meals for students, advisory services, obtaining support for festivals held in the school etc. As such, every school takes an interest in the development of these relations.

Parents, past pupils and well- wishers make a contribution for the development of the school by providing contributions and involving in tasks like shramdana campaigns, assisting in the maintenance of the cleanliness of the school, its beautification and repair of the premises. All these relations are mutually useful to the school and the neighbourhood community. Maintaining relations with representatives of the public

Funds necessary for the sections of the school that require improvement and acquisition of equipment are released by the Central Government and the Provincial Council on the recommendations of the people's representative. By getting people's representatives to associate with the school the opportunities for the development of the school increases.Service rendered to the school by society

Fig 1.15A shramadana campaign in a school

A medical clinic conducted in a school.

Fig 1.16

38

for free distribution

For the school - community relations to continue well, the school should remain open to society. For example,

² Use of the assembly hall of the school, grounds buildings for community services. ² To conduct health camps. ² Education of the community regarding contemporary health, social and environmental problems through educational campaigns. How the community is harnessed for the activities of the school

1 Utilization of physical resources that can be obtained from the community for the development of the school.

2. Obtaining the services of various resource persons endowed with knowledge and skills for the development of the school.

For example, inviting the ayurvedic physician of the area to the school and educating the students on traditional cures and medicines.

The schools which have a safe and clean environment facilitiesareconsidered as the child-friendly school. There, everyone respects each other's rights. Everyone receives equal respect despite their economic problems, disabilities, diseases, race and religion. Such schools that safeguard children's basic rights can be identified as the child-friendly schools.

Features of child-friendly schools ³Provided with water and other sanitary facilities ³Have a safe learning environment

³Have a pleasant class room environment

Fig 1.17and sanitary

39

for free distribution

³Have a student-centered learning and teaching system ³Teachers willingly change their teaching methods to meet the difference of the students ³Get the support of the community in the planning and managing school affairs

Every child is a special child. The Child Friendly School shoulders the onerous task of maximising the special potentials of their students to produce and gift to the country human resources essential for the development of the land.

Quoted from : Child Friendly School, Primary Education Branch, Ministry of Education

Activity 24

1.) Prepare a handout for the education of the community, based on your investigation of human activities that promote destruction of the environment of your region.2.) There are two groups from which the contribution of society can be obtained; Past Students’ Society and Parents' Circle.

I. Write three tasks that the Past Students’ Society can perform'II. Write a short description of the service rendered to the school by the Parents’ Circle'

SUMMARYHaving studied this unit you would have understood the following. ²That self understanding and management contribute to the development of characters. ²The importance of the school culture and adherence to it. ²Your duties and rights as a member of the school. ²That it is possible for the mutual co–operation between the school and the community outside be made to contribute to the development of the school and the community. ²That the co–operation of the community outside can be obtained for the benefit of the school.

40

for free distribution

02The Region We Live

in

Sri Lanka is an island blessed with beautiful gifts of nature. Its fertile land, valuable natural resources, conducive climate, decent people and its proud history generate immense pride in us. When thinking of the region you live in, you may have the good fortune to claim that it is gifted with one or more of the assets mentioned above.

This chapter will guide you to study about where your area is situated and the institutions and the people that/who help you.

The location of the region we live in and its administrative system

Country (Sri Lanka)

GramaNiladhari's Division

DivisionalSecretariat

District

Province

Home

Diagram.2.1 Administrative Units of Sri LankaLet us get to know the Grama Niladhari's Division

According to the administrative divisions of our country, the smallest administrative unit is the Grama Niladhari’s division. By joining one or more villages the Grama Niladhari’s division is made. The officer in charge of this is the Grama Niladhari. He functions as the officer maintaining liaison between the people of the village and information.

41

for free distribution

 Activity 01

³ Complete the table below.

1. Grama Niladhari’s Division your house belongs to Name: No:

2. Grama Niladhari’s Division your school belongs to Name: No:

Divisional Secretariat our region belongs to

The administrative unit developed by joining several Grama Niladharis’ divisions is the Divisional Secretariat. Its head is the Divisional Secretary. He/She is the authority responsible for all the official activities of all the Grama Niladhari Divisions in his region of authority, with the government.

 Activity 02

³ What is the name of the Divisional Secretary’s Division your

region belongs to?

District to which our region belongs

The administrative unit developed by combining several Divisional Secretariat Divisions is called a District. Its head is the District Secretary. There are twenty five Administrative Districts in our country and the region you live in belongs to one such Administrative District. Figure 6.2 is a map of Sri Lanka showing the Administrative Districts.

42

for free distribution

Fig: 2.1 Administrative Districts of Sri Lanka

 Activity 03

³ Based on the map above, mark on a map of Sri Lanka the district to which the region you live in belongs.

Province to which we belong

Sri Lanka comprises of nine main provinces and each province is made up of several districts. Map No. 2.2 shows the province – wise division of Sri Lanka. Using it, identify correctly the province in which the region you live in, is located.

43

for free distribution

Fig: 2.2 Provinces of Sri Lanka

N

 Activity 04

² Based on the administrative units you learned about, describe correctly the location of your province.The physical resources in our province Physical resources are made up of two main parts. That is, as natural resources and resources that are not natural. The sunlight we receive, fresh air, clean water, soil, hills, valleys, plains, jungles, beaches, rivers, waterfalls, lagoons etc are among the natural resources. Resources created by man are resources that are not natural. Buildings, vehicles, equipment etc are examples of these. Figure No. 6.4

44

for free distribution

shows a few of our physical resources. Since these are essential for man's existence, it is your greatest responsibility that they are safeguarded as life itself.

Fig: 2.3

A large number of resources can be seen in the region we live in. Sunlight, air, water, the earth, buildings are some of the resources common to all the areas. However, there are some resources which become unique to a particular area. For example, rivers, streams, forests, waterfalls, mountains, plains and minerals etc.

 Activity 05

² Prepare a document on the main physical resources to be seen in your region. ² Prepare a creative hand–out containing information on the resources identified by you. ² Observe well the flora to be seen in your region and complete the table below.

Names of the types of trees Special characteristics1'2'3'4'

² Observe the animals always seen in your region and prepare a document about them.

45

for free distribution

²Let us use the resources in our region effectively.Several of the uses of physical resources are given below.

Diagram 2.2

Power

Highways

Sunlight

Forests

Minerals

Land

Water

Air/Wind

Power

Transport

Transport

Power

Drinking

Housing

Industries

Industries

Industries

Industries

Agriculture

Agriculture

ParksTourismTimber

Light

Diagram 2.2 shows how physical resources are utilized for personal, social, socio-economic needs of the neighbouring region.

Diagram 2.3

Build a houseHome gardening

Getting water from a well

Personalneeds

Construction of industrial cities

Build a housing complexTheLand

Socialneeds

Set up trade

Commence development ProjectEconomicneeds

Cultivation for needs of food

Construction of factories for industrial needs

Photographs under fig (2.5) shows that several physical resources in the region around us are employed for human needs.

The Land

46

for free distribution

Fig: 2.4Recall instances where various physical resources are made use of in your region. Recall that they have to be made use of most effectively and frugally as a matter of extreme importance. Just as bees collect honey from the flower without harming it, it is the duty of man that he uses the resources gifted by nature so as to cause them no damage. In order to ensure the existence of a conducive environment, this is essential.

47

for free distribution

 Activity 06

³ Complete the table below based on the physical resources in your region that you make use of

ResourcePurpose for which it is made use of• The Land• Water• Minerals• Other

........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

Let us conserve resources

The physical resources in our region perform an immense service for the existence of man and to satisfy his needs. Therefore, it is our duty to safeguard them for the well-being of the environment and to hand it over to future generations. A number of problems have arisen due to the improper use of the land, air, water, rivers, streams, forests, wild life etc by man. These problems pose a threat not only to the existence of man as well as to the existence of the environment. Therefore, it is important that we think of the service physical resources render to man and inculcate positive attitudes to their conservation.

Procedures that can be followed to conserve physical resources

² Conservation of forestseg. Planting trees ² Making maximum use of resourceseg. Reuse, recycling ² Minimizing wastage of resources eg. Water, electricity, fuel ² Soil conservationeg. Building bunds, drains for water to flow down ² Refraining from adding non – bio degradable material to the soil.eg. Polythene ² Avoiding burning of wasteeg. Straw, plastic

48

for free distribution

² Filling up of locations where minerals have been mined. eg. Filling in earth quarries, filling of gem mines. ² Use of alternate materialseg. Concrete in place of timber, plastic

 Activity 07

² Select one physical resource in your region and suggest actions that can be taken to conserve it. ² Present in the form of a poster or drawing the above activity implemented according to your suggestion. Our human resources

People living in the area are a resource to us. Man becomes a human resource by developing his intellectual as well as his physical abilities. In our area a number of such resources can be identified.

A multitude of resources like farmers, teachers, doctors, nurses, masons, carpenters, engineers including technicians and mechanics, government workers, researchers and scientists, aesthetes, media people, athletes etc help us.

 Activity 08

² Identify the human resources seen in these photographs and name them.

49

for free distribution

² Identify the human resources living in your area and prepare a document. ² Prepare and present a table containing the human resources in your area and their uses.How the value of the human resources can be increasedFrom birth, man is endowed with certain abilities. They can be identified as intellectual abilities, physical abilities, social abilities etc. It is important that man’s inborn abilities are improved and that they are formally practised. For this purpose various courses and training programmes are implemented in the society around the area. Through these the individual can improve one’s abilities and develop the ability to build up the vocational world around him.The diagram below shows the uses obtained by training human resources systematically.Country develops

↑Derives economic advantages

↑Improves professionally

↑Can perform one’s profession well

↑Can acquire professional qualifications

↑Can improve abilities

↑By training Human Resources

Diagram - 2.4

50

for free distribution

Regional economic affairsThe people in your area have different kinds of occupations' Most of them are based on the resources of your area. There are people who engage in agriculture basing it on the land. At the same time you may find some people who engage in many other industries based on the various resources in your area. These industries provide different types of products to the market. You may find the persons who engage in poultry, business and other occupations in your area. Think about the economic activities in your area.

 Activity 09

² Get to know about the institutes that conduct professional development courses in your area. ² Prepare a document containing the training courses conducted by these institutes. ² Prepare a poster containing the information above and display it in the classroom. ² Complete the following table.

Resources in the area.Products related to resourcesProfessions related to productse.g: claybricksbrickmaking1

22.2 Living co–operatively with the people of the area

From the origin of human society, man did not have enough courage to face various challenges such as hunting animals. He neither had sharp vision, sense of smell, strong arms and jaws that are needed for hunting animals, nor sharp canine teeth or nails. He was not extremely capable of running, swimming, flying and climbing trees. Therefore, he needed the others, assistance in search of food and find protection.When people started living co-operatively, human society emerged, and their co-operative existence caused building up of a developed human civilization.

51

for free distribution

You also have worked co-operatively with your neighbours and villagers. For instance, co-operativity can be seen at shramadana campaigns, religious festivals, funerals and at sudden disasters. The support of others eases the work at the workplace and the school.

Diagram 2.5According to the diagram above, you would have understood that co-operation spreads across a wide range.

Fig: 2.5 Situations where people work in co-operation in the area

 Activity 10

²Write three situations where people in your area work in co-operation. ²Out of them, select one and write a short play and produce it along with your friends. ²All of you in the class get together and carry out a co–operative activity for the benefit of your school. Discuss your experience with the other students in the class.

52

for free distribution

Uses of working in co-operation

 Activity 11

² Discuss in your class the qualities developed through working co–operatively, based on your experience.

2.3Those who help us

When living in society we need the assistance of outside individuals and institutions in order to fulfill our needs. Several institutions and service providers are active in society for these purpose.

 Activity 12

³Prepare a document on the government officers who provide various services for the people of the area you live in. ³Design a poster on the services provided by a selected few of these officers.

Diagram.2.6

Safeguardsculture Achieves objectives

Saves time

Success

Convenience

Good will

Pleasure

Brotherhood

Saves money

Unity

Uses got fromCo- opertiveness

53

for free distribution

Given below is a description and services of six government officers who help you. Understand it and name the relevant officer.

The officer who performs a number of services like confirming the residence of villages, distribution of state relief, taking action against illegal activities, collecting necessary information regarding residents is ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The officer responsible for the control of infectious diseases, heath inspection of students, informing people regarding health / medical clinics, implementing inoculation programs etc. is ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The officer who makes arrangements to provide relief funds, conducts programmes to uplift the status of life of poor people, conducts projects to develop villages is ...................

The officer who gives advice on protecting maternal and child health, conducts nutrition programmes for children, gives inoculation at maternal and children’s clinics, is ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The officer who assists you by protecting the rules and regulations enacted by the government, protects peace, arranges assistance in sudden disasters, is ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The officer who helps you by delivering letters and parcels sent to you, delivers election cards etc is ''''''''''''''''''''''''''''Institutions that help us

In the area you live in, you can notice a number of government and non-governmental institutions that assist in the satisfaction of public and official needs of the people. Let us study the services of a selected few of them.

54

for free distribution

Divisional Secretariat

All the services rendered by the government for the public living in the respective area can be obtained from this institution. Several examples of these are given below.

² Issue of Birth Certificates

² Approval of Grama Seva Certificates

² Issue of licenses eg : felling of trees, transport, income licenses, state land licenses, environment permits

² Provision of relief

² Implementation of relevant activities regarding payment of pensions

²Issue of identity cards

 Activity 13

² Inquire from members of your family about the services they got from the Divisional Secretariat and note them.

Local Government InstitutionsMunicipal Councils

An extremely complex urban region is known as the municipality. There are several such regions in our country. Examples of these are Colombo, Kandy, Jaffna, Kurunegala, Nuwara Eliya, Dehiwala Mt. Lavinia. The head of a Municipal Council is the Mayor. Given below are a few services rendered by the Municipal Council.

² Cleaning and maintenance of streets

²Reconstruction of water–ways and removal of garbage

²Maintenance of the markets and public health

² Maintenance of playgrounds, libraries and parks

²Construction and maintenance of public amenities

²Maintenance of street lights

55

for free distribution

 Activity 14

³ Write down the name of the Municipal Council close to you.³ Out of the services below select the services provided by the Municipal Council and mark ( ) in the box against it

² Provision of transport facilities ² Cleaning and maintenance of the streets of the city ² Removal of garbage, protection of public health ² Construction of buildings ² Maintenance of public markets, city parks, libraries ² Provision of lighting and water service to public places

Urban CouncilsUrbanized regions which are less in population and complexity are called Urban councils. The head of each urban council is a chairman. Given below are a few of the services provided by the Urban Council.

² Provision of public health services ² Maintenance of libraries, sports grounds, parks, public toilets etc. ² Systematization of water supply and drainage. ² Control and maintenance of streets and public buildings. ² Disposal of garbage, cleaning of the city.

Village Councils Semi urban areas and rural areas that do not come under Urban Councils belong to Village Councils. Given below are a few of the numerous services rendered by the Village Councils: ² Construction and maintenance of roadways in one's region of operations. ² Improvement and implementation of bathing ferries, trade centers. ² Disposal of garbage and cleaning of streets and roads in the area. ² Approval of building construction. ² Maintenance of social welfare activities.

56

for free distribution

 Activity 15

³ Inquire about the services rendered by the Provincial Council situated close to your home or school and complete the information below.

² Name of the Provincial Council :........................................... ² If the services below are provided by the Provincial Council to the public mark ( ) if not mark (×) in the box provided. Cleaning and maintenance of roadways Proper disposal of garbage Collection of taxes Lighting of streets and public places Maintaining libraries and pre-schools Charging trade taxes

Hospitals

Fig: 2'6

The hospital is the main institution that provides its services twenty four hours of the day for the provision of the health of the public. Doctors, nurses, as well as the entire staff of the hospital provide an efficient service in order to provide relief when one is struck by disease or has been the victim of an accident. Government Hospitals provide all these services to the public free of charge. Government allocates a large amount of money for providing these services.

57

for free distribution

Services rendered by places of religious worship

Fig: 2.7

People of various ethnic groups live in Sri Lanka. As such there are different places of religious worship in our neighbourhood.

It is a pleasure to hear the pirith chanting from one side of the country while hearing the echoing sound of Holy Koran from another side. Same as we hear the choirs from the church and the jingling bells from the kovil nearby. This is religious co-exsistence and the identity of our country; Sri Lanka.

Services provided by places of religious worship ³Provide knowledge of the Dhamma. ³Disciplining by teaching ethics. ³Conduct religious rituals, services, offerings. ³Blessing in order to make personal life successful. ³Help cultivate spiritual values. ³Provide leadership at weddings and bereavements ³Provide leadership in public activities. ³Take the lead regarding national needs. ³Provide advice and blessings ³Ensure inter-racial unity.

 Activity 16

³ Prepare a register of the various places of religious worship in your area.

58

for free distribution

³

LendingSociety

YouthSociety

Co–operativeSociety Environment Societies

SportsSocietiesFuneralSocieties

RuralDevelopment Societies

FarmerOrganization

Fishers’ SocietyBuddhist Society

Societies in the region

 Activity 17

Diagram.2.7

³

59

for free distribution

Services Provided by the Societies in the Region

SocietyServices ProvidedCo – operative society Subsidized trade/ Purchase of agricultural materialFarmer societiesProvides advice/ Provide subsidies/ Provision of welfare servicesFishery societiesPurchase/ Provide welfare servicesRural Development societies Development work in the areaFuneral societiesFuneral services/ Provision of welfare services

 Activity 18

³ All the students of your class get together and set up a Children’s Society.³ Through the Children’s Society you set up, implement a program for the improvement of the abilities and talents of students in your class.Duties of the institutions that provide us with services ² Proper provision of one’s services ² Functioning efficiently ² Provision of correct advice and guidance ² Acting without being bias ² Functions so as to be fair by everybody ² Being friendly when working with the people ² Avoiding wrong doing in what one doesDuties of us who receive services ² Payment of taxes correctly ² Providing necessary participation, when rendering service ² Following advice and guidance, correctly ² Protecting institutions and the property of institutions providing service ²Avoiding obtaining services through improper means ² Maintaining friendly relations with service providers ²Appreciating services provided by them and provide recognition for the service

60

for free distribution

 Activity 19

² Select an institution that provides services to your area and discuss the duties due from you for such service.

Summary When contributing to the development of the country, it is very important to have good awareness of the area we live in, we identified the Grama Niladhri's division, Divisional Secretariat, district and the province we belong to. We were able to identify the physical resources and how they can be used in the social and economic needs and how to economize them. Human resource is the most precious resource and it can be divided as intellectual and physical abilities. We can develop its quality through training. The economic affairs in the region can be divided into agricultural affairs, industrial affairs and services. Most of the time, these affairs are based on the human and physical resources of the region. Co-operative living of the people in a particular area contribute to the advancement of both region and the family. There are many examples of such occasions, where the work becomes easy resulting in many advantages. There are many individual and group organizations which support the people. Religious institutions, public institutions and provincial councils are very important. Government officers and many others have been involved into that network. Many needs of the area are fulfilled by this. These institutions and people help the general public in the social and economic affairs and spiritual development. Apart from these institutions various associations and committees also help the people in their needs. The institutions and the individuals who receive the services should perform their duties. By studying this chapter you can understand that through inter relationship we can expect the development of individuals as well as society.

61

for free distribution

Both Personal and social development contribute to the development of the necessary qualities of a good citizen. Among the qualities that should be inculcated for this purpose, use of decent language and good behaviour are very important. We find both good and bad in our society. Good citizens always add qualities to lives.The responsibility of a good citizen is to protect the resources of the motherland and dedicate oneself to safeguard its dignity.

Apart from the qualities mentioned above, being loyal and righteous are also considered virtuous. We should identify these qualities and add them to our lives. Then we are able to show the world that Sri Lanka is a country of virtuous citizens.

3.1. Practicing polite language You get the opportunity to associate with friends in your class room as well as in your school. Similarly you have to associate with various types of people at home as well as in society. Think about the people you associate with. Remember how you got to know each other. You may have asked their name, village, age, siblings and many more details and vice versa. You may remember how you talked to them using very pleasant words. It is possible that the good relationship between you and them would have been based on those polite and pleasant words. If you had not used such words, there would not be such a good relationship. If it is so, you would have only a few friends. To be a good friend among friends and to win the hearts of your family members as a virtuous individual, you should practice polite language.

Features of polite speech ³Discipline in speech ³Express clear and correct ideas. ³Respect others

A Good Citizen03

62

for free distribution

³Adopt correct posture when speaking ³Listen to others and speak patiently ³Do not misuse language ³Maintain eye contact when speaking. ³Identify where to talk and where not to If you use language knowing the person whom you are going to speak to and what the situation and place is, you will be able to achieve successful communication.

Language should be used to suit the individual and place

• According to the situation.

³Weddings and Receptions ³Sports and special functions ³Funerals ³Debates and discussions ³Public speech (radio, television, newspapers, magazines, amplifiers)• According to the place

³Religious places (temple, mosque, church, kovil) ³Home, school, road, bus, train ³Mass communication (radio, television, newspaper, maga-zine, loud speaker)• According to the individual. ³Clergyman, Priest ³Parents ³Teachers, elders ³Friends, visitors

There are many advantages you derive get when you use polite language and also disadvantages. There are many occasions where you are not practicing it. Read the following table and think whether you have had the same experiences.

63

for free distribution

Good in polite languageBad in impolite language• Receive others' respect• Good connections.• Improve leadership qualities.• Be able to win the hearts of the others. • Be able to build up good personal contacts. • Get more opportunities to gain benefits.

• Disturb personal relationships• Become isolated in society • Lose friends.• Economic loss.• Lose opportunities to be a leader.

wekqïmo fkdlshñnekqï le; nia fkdlshñkslï nia fkdlshñ;rï muKg joka f;m,ñ ^isß;a u,aou - .=re uqykaÈrï weï' we,a' is,ajd&

_k ö\õØPÒ ö\õÀ»©õm÷hßH_Áuõ´ CÈö©õÈPÒ ö\õÀ»©õm÷hßö£õ¸ÎÀ»õ ÷£a_PøÍ¨ ÷£\©õm÷hßAÍÄUS AvP©õ²® ÷£\©õm÷hß

]›z ©Àu© & S¸ •P¢vµ® G®. GÀ. ]ÀÁõ

Shall not utter abuseNo insults utter IPlay with idle talkShall utter words that suitsmy status (Translation- Sirith Maldama - Guru Muhandiram M.L. Silva)

 Activity 1

Prepare dialogues for a role play which shows how to communicate politely using appropriate language patterns according to the situations given below.

64

for free distribution

³A situation where you speak to a priest about a religious activity in your family. ³A situation where you met a close friend of yours after a long time. ³A situation where you inquire from the judge of a competition about a problematic situation of it.3.2. Let us come to conclusions through respecting the views of others.

“We cannot live alone in this society”. Therefore we have to build up connections with others and communicate with them. When we communicate with each other we can have good understanding of the other party by listening carefully. It is very important to express one’s ideas clearly and let the others to express their own views. When you listen carefully, the speaker will have a pleasant feeling about you. It is possible to come out with opposing ideas when you communicate with each other. But you should have the strength to tolerate them. The other party may have a wider knowledge than you of a particular topic. Then you will be able to create new and useful knowledge through the new knowledge you received. Moreover, the exchange of ideas is very important to maintain good connections with others. Misunderstanding will lead to conflicts. However, the conclusions or agreements that come out of discussions lead to personal and social development.

• Listening is merely paying attention to a sound.

• Active listening is listening attentively and comprehensively.

A person who listens actively, will give one or more of the following responses;

E.g: Questioning, answering, suggesting, approving

65

for free distribution

By active listeningBy not listening actively Comprehend messages given correctlyDo not comprehend messages correctlyProvide responses according to the messageDo not provide expected responses

Build up confidence on one’s own self and on othersPossibility to build up doubt and lack of confidenceBuild up wholesome social relationshipsBeing isolated without developing social relationshipsOpportunities are created to come to agreementsOpportunities to come to agreements are avoidedLess possibilities for conflicts since conclusions were made by discussions Instead of agreements problems and conflicts arise.

For active listening;

³Use of clear language ³Careful listening ³Listen with understanding

Qualities to be improved in order to develop interpersonal skills through effective communication.

• Presenting one's ideas clearly and appropriately.• Tolerate others' ideas.• Appreciate others' ideas.• Resolution of conflicting views through effective discussion.• Neutralize the mismatching ideas through effective discussion.• Let the others express their own ideas.• Try to draw successful conclusions.• Express straightforward ideas at the correct time• Work according to the ideas that came out from discussions.

66

for free distribution

 Activity 2

01. Write down briefly the experiences you had to face due to the lack of active listening.

02. List out the advantages you have had through practising the skill of active listening.

03. Ask one of your elders the story of Kaluwa who went to Marapana (Kaluwa Marapana giya wage) and present your ideas on Kaluwa’s listening.3.3. Let us behave in a disciplined manner

Fig: 3.1Incident : The bus-train accidentDate : 25th of April 2005Place : Yangalmodara railway crossing near the Kurunegala – Alawwa roadNumber of deaths : forty one (41)Number of injured persons : over thirty fiveReason for the accident : the bus crashed on to the train when it tried to cross the closed railway gatePunishment : Both the driver and the conductor were sentenced to death.

67

for free distribution

You have heard about traffic accidents in Sri Lanka most of the time. You may have seen or heard about these kinds of accidents daily through mass media. Some accidents happen due to the carelessness and indiscipline of people. The above accident in picture 3.1 occurred as a result of the unnecessary haste, indiscipline and ill-mannered nature of the driver. It was reported that the, only child of a particular family had lost his life due to this fatal accident. Many children became helpless with the death of their parents. People who lost their lives and became disabled are precious lives of our country. This shows how the minute act of one person affects the whole society in different ways. Good behaviour of every single person is needed very much for the well-being of the whole society.What is discipline and good-behavior?Discipline means acting according to social standards and following the rules and regulations of society.Well-behaviour is also all about the discipline of a person. It means behaving according to the rules and regulations, constitutions and customs. When there is discipline and good-behaviour one will respect others, love others, apologize and accept fault.Qualities to be improved to become a disciplined and well-behaved person : ² Follow rules and regulations and customs

² Respect each other

² Respect the values of society

² Kindness

² Humanity

² Cooperation

² Friendliness

² Righteousness

² Patience

² Honesty

² Truthfulness

68

for free distribution

Disciplined behaviour in the family and society

Life skills to be improved for discipline and good behaviour

On the road ³Follow traffic rules ³Use road with care of yourself and others ³Use the road considering it as public property ³Be patient ³Be an example to others ³Safeguard your dignity through discipline and well-being

In the school ³Engage in studies ³Use the resources of the school with care ³Safeguard the dignity of the school through well-being ³Follow the rules and regulations of the school ³Obey one's teachers and respect them ³Respect the school flag and national flag, and safeguard them ³Polite behaviour (Decorum)

In the family ³Treat every sibling equally and be attentive to them ³Be obedient, respect and help parents ³Treat respectfully the elders in the family ³Speak politely ³Good Behaviour ³Not interrupting elders’ conversations without permission ³Be well-mannered in using mass media such as the radio, television, computer and Internet

In society ³Help the innocent, disabled and elderly people ³Handle public property with care ³Respect others ³Respect every religion ³Display Good behaviour in various types of religious activities ³Decide on the appropriate behaviour and the dress code according to the situation ³Be well-mannered at various functions (national festivals, weddings, funerals)

69

for free distribution

The importance of maintaining discipline and decorum

³Protect your dignity and pride ³Be able to conduct a happy and free life ³Receive the respect and love of others ³Build up national and religious harmony ³Become a virtuous citizen in society ³Become trustworthy among others ³Minimize conflicts in society ³Minimize accidents ³Eschew disgrace and punishment ³Create a peaceful society ³Create a society where the people respect social etiquette

 Activity 3

01. List how to behave well in the school, on the road and at home.

3.4. Let us distinguish between the good and the bad

There is good and bad in society. There are good people as well as bad people among the people you associate with. You will gain good from the good people and that of bad from the bad people as long as they become your companions. Sometimes you may find both good and bad qualities in the same person. You can make your future a success through keen awareness of your surroundings. Let us see what are the good deeds which lead you to a successful future and what are the bad conducts you should avoid.

70

for free distribution

The good in society Their results

EducationGain knowledgebecome a scholarfoundation for a good lifeStudy your religion and follow itLead a disciplined life-styleMental awakeningBecome a prestigious and restrained personFollow good health habits and lead a healthy lifeBecome a healthy person

Select an appropriate dress codeReceive honour from societyCan stay relaxedUse mass media (Telephone, Internet, Print and visual media)carefully

Save timeGain pleasure and knowledgePolish up the way of thinking Update knowledgeAssociate with good friends who stay all the time with you

Can share sorrow and joyCan get examples and adviseProtectionHonor from society

Let us identify the bad conducts in our society ³Not having a good education ³Company of bad friends ³Ignore religion ³Misled by commercials ³Adherence to blind faith. ³Practice ill - mannered behaviours. ³Commit illegal acts. ³Use culturally inappropriate fashions ³Use of harmful food ³Listen and watch rubbish programs and videos on the inter-net and other mass media. ³Earn through illegal industries ³Addiction to liquor, drugs, cigarettes and associate with those who are addicted to them.

71

for free distribution

Some possess both good and bad qualities. For example, the mobile phone can be used as an effective multi- functional equipment. If we use the same equipment in the wrong way, it will cause bad results. Likewise the computer, television, radio and cinema also can be used for both good and bad. Although you find very attractive types of food in the market, you should be very careful about their nutrition, qualities, sanitation and how they affect your life. Let us be aware of the bad in our society and keep in our minds that they will bring on bad results to our society.

 Activity 4

Complete the following chart mentioning the results of the good and bad in our society.

The good in our society The results by practising good

The bad in our society The results by practising bad01 Reading books02 Composing poems03 New inventions04 Sports 05 Collecting stamps06 Use of the internet07 Use of the television08 Appreciate local things09 Preserve the national heritage

3.5.Let us respect our traditions, rules and regulations

There are traditions related to the various stages of our social life. Similarly, there are a number of rules and regulations which are necessary for good administration. These two aspects result in the well-being of the person and society. When hoisting the school flag, reciting the school anthem and the national anthem we should respect them. We do it because it has become one of our traditions and social

72

for free distribution

standards. Here we all become a group of the followers of social traditions and rules and regulations.A quiz competition was held at the Navodya Maha Vidyalaya in the North Western province by the grade 6 students on the topic of “Let us respect social traditions, rules and regulations”. This program consisted of two groups called Hiru and Sandu. This was conducted by the teachers of Citizenship Education and History.

Hiru group Sandu group

Explain what ''traditions'' means and give three examples.

Traditions mean the social standards that have existed from the past.

1. Respect the customs of our own society2. Respect elders3. Protect one’s own cultural heritage

What are rules? Please give us 3 examples.

The conditions passed by the government for the personal and social benefit and to control the personal behaviours are called rules. For example; traffic law, criminal law, etc. Every rule has a punishment. Law considers everyone equally.

73

for free distribution

What is '' regulation''?

Regulations are the set of conditions accepted as not to be done

State four advantages of following traditions

1. Have a peaceful environment.2. Minimize conflicts by respecting each other.3. Build up love and trust among each other4. Build up a friendly environment for a good administration.

Customs are what we should follow including what we should avoid or refrain from.Customs: 1. Religious observation worship 2. Parents and the teachers 3. Polite use of languageManners 1. Chew nails and hair 2. Eavesdrop on others secret conversations. 3. Dress up in unsuitable dress codes.

What are customs and manners? Please give us 3 examples.

74

for free distribution

State 3 advantages of following rules and regulations

All of you participated in the quiz competition. Every answer is correct. The two groups have equal marks and therefore both teams win the competition today. We hope you may improve your knowledge of social traditions and rules and regulations through this competition.

Respecting as well as following social traditions, rules and regulations is our responsibility and then our society will become a better place to live in

 Activity 5

1. Prepare a booklet on traffic rules and pedestrian rules.2. Prepare a list of traditions you follow in your school and at home.

3.6. Let us use resources economically

Resources are what we blessed with, by the nature. The Following are examples of such resources we use; ² Sun light ² Land ² Mineral resources ² Wild animals

² Air ² Water ² Forests These natural resources help the existence of human beings as well as the environment around us. We use the resources in our environment

Produce good leadersProduce a righteous societyProduce a peaceful environment

75

for free distribution

in order to satisfy our various needs. Air, water and sunlight are essential resources in our lives.We produce different kinds of things using natural resources such as land, forests and mineral resources. Think about various tools you use to fulfil your needs at the school and at home. All these tools are man - made, using the resources in our environment. Examples of man - made resources:

Furniture Glassware Porcelain Roofing tiles BricksLook at the following pictures. Think about the resources used to make them.

Fig. 3.2 Why should we economize on resources?

Do you know that most of the resources we use are limited?Water is an essential natural resource. Water is essential and useful for drinking as well as for other daily needs. More than that, we essentially need water for food cultivation, industries and numerous other things. Although most parts of our earth have been covered by water, the amount of drinking water is very little. We always hear about incidents related to the pollution done to water by people. Therefore, we should use water economically and avoid water pollution.Land is also a limited resource. Apart from mountains, reservoirs and swamps, there is very little land for human habitats and food cultivation.

76

for free distribution

Just as water and land, we have very limited resources of mineral oil, coal, iron, copper, tin, sand and mud also. These resources get depleted when we use them. You can understand this situation through a simple example. When you pump petrol or some other fuel into your vehicle it burns and the vehicle runs on the power generated. Fuel that is burnt cannot be recovered. Coal is also a very good example of this. Therefore, all of us are expected to use these resources economically.

The consumption of the resources has been increased as a result of the development of the industrial sector. As the population and the needs of the people increase, the consumption of resources increases day by day automatically.

The resources are not equally distributed on earth. These days in Sri Lanka a mineral oil exploration is taking place. Coal has not been found in Sri Lanka yet. Hence, we have to import some of the resources from other countries and have to spend a large amount of money on imports. Therefore, we should use resources frugally in order to meet our needs. At the same time, we should preserve them for future generations. We should consider it as our duty and responsibility. How to prevent waste of resources

Resource Measured to prevent waste of resources

Water • Open the water tap according to the need.• Close tight after using the tap• Use a vessel when using water for washing Electricity • Unplug electric equipment when they are not in use• Iron clothes as much as possible at one time• Use lights of high efficiencyDesks, chairs and other equipment• Paint them and prevent corrosion• Do not expose them to damp.

77

for free distribution

The advantages to us of the prevention of waste of resources.

²Save money

²Save resources for future generations to meet their needs

²Minimize environmental disasters

 Activity 6

(1) Complete the following chart

Write down three pieces of equipment use in your home

Write down the resources that have been used to make them.

1'2'3'

3.7 Let us protect public property

We have a number of needs to be accomplished in our daily life. Food, home and clothes are our basic needs. Education, getting treatment for diseases, travelling, enjoying leisure are also among our needs. Other than these needs there are many more needs to be fulfilled in our daily life. Think about the services provided to meet these needs.

The school is for education. Hospitals are for getting treatment for diseases. Bus services are there for our needs in travelling. Similarly there are many facilities provided to spend our leisure. Think about different types of such institutions that have been established to meet your needs.

The buildings, equipment, machines and many other materials that belong to these services are called public property.

The service stations and their property which have been established with the contributions of the general public to fulfill their own necessities are called public properties.

78

for free distribution

The nature of the public property• The main objective is the well-being of the general public and provide services to them.• These facilities have been provided by the government without expecting any profit• Available to everyone.

Fig. 3.3

Buildings, desks, chairs, computers, library books, laboratory equipment, sport equipment etc. in your school are public property. They are provided to you by the government to filfill your educational needs. You have the right to use them in order to polish your skills and at the same time you are expected to preserve them for future generation.

The buildings, tools and different types of equipment in a hospital are public property which help to provide health services. Every person who gets the service of these places should consider that it is their duty to protect them and keep the place clean.

The government has taken steps to renew roads and construct high ways in Sri Lanka. The objectives of these projects are to facilitate fast and safe journeys and the transport of goods. Safety fences and traffic lights have been established, considering the safety of its users. It is our responsibility to protect them as citizens.

Besides, we should not misuse roads or obstruct travelling. The pedestrians and the drivers who use the roads should care about their own safety and that of others.

We use electricity to facilitate our daily activities. As such, every citizen should be concerned about protecting power stations and the equipment which generate electricity.

79

for free distribution

Buses, bus stands, trains, railway stations, play grounds, children’s parks and libraries are also considered public property. We should contribute to protect and keep these places clean, as good citizens.

There are common wells, tube wells, tanks and irrigation works in rural areas to fulfill citizens' common needs. Apart from the above mentioned public property, there are many other public utilities for common services which help meet common needs of our society. We as virtuous citizens should handle public property with care.

The advantages of protecting public property.

²Can provide efficient service

²As it saves the expenditure of renewing and maintaining, the remaining money can be used for the development of the country.

²Be able to improve the facilities to ensure good living standards.

²Preserve them for the needs of future generation.

Measures to protect public property

²Protect public properties considering them as our duty and responsibility

²Avoid misuse of public property ²Inform the relevant institutions about the damage caused to public property

²Give the same opportunity to others to use them

²Do not use public property as private property ²Pay maintenance fees regularly ²Inform the authorized institutions when you find any kind of serious damage, caused to a public property. ²Educate the others on protecting public property

80

for free distribution

 Activity 7

01. Read the following headings in column I, II, III, IV and complete the chart.

Column IColumn II Column III Column IVPublic property used dailyThe services provided by such property

The difficulties one faces if they are destroyed

Measures to be taken to protect them

02. Prepare a poster on the importance of protecting public property.

03. Prepare a list of telephone numbers of the institutions that one should inform about the misuse and damage to public property.

04. Identify water leaks on taps in your school and inform your teacher in charge of Citizenship Education

05. Identify a particular place where you can find damaged public property and suggest what you can do to minimize the damage.4.2—Let us protect the environment˜

We are surrounded by the environment. The air, sea, waterfalls, rivers, animals, natural trees are considered the natural environment. They are the gifts of nature. Beside this, the most important thing is, all of them have been created without the intervention or influence of man.

The environment created without the intervention of man is called the physical environment.

Here are some photographs of beautiful scenery from the physical environment.

81

for free distribution

Fig. 3.4

Man is also a part of the same environment. You can find different types of man-made objects all around the environment. Parks, buildings, roads, pounds, tanks are examples for them. They can be called built environment.

Man-made objects in the natural environment belong to built environment.

The following are photographs of such creations.

Fig. 3.5

82

for free distribution

We use the environment and its resources in order to fufill our needs. As the population and the needs increase, our interference with the environment also increases.Therefore, damage caused to water, land and air has increased gradually. Here are some reasons for environmental pollution.

The component of the environment

Reasons for pollution

Water ² Disposal of waste into water ² Excessive use of chemical fertilizers in cultivation ² Use of agro chemicalsLand ² Improper disposal of waste ² Use of chemical fertilizers in cultivation ² Use of agro chemicals ² Destruction of forests.Air ² Smoke released from factories ² Smoke released from vehiclesSound pollution ² Excessive sound from loud speakers ² Sounds of horns ² Sounds of rock blasting

Fig. 3.6

83

for free distribution

We have heard about environmental pollution and pollution due to the immense damage caused by mankind to the environment. Now, we are facing the problem of drinking contaminated water which causes numerous diseases. Similarly fish and other aquatic resources have been destroyed as a result of water pollution.Air pollution also causes various diseases. Further, there is the danger of atmospheric warming due to the heat of the earth and destruction of the ozone layer. How to protect the environment as good citizens. ²Be sensitive to the environment ²Avoid disposing waste into water. ²Keep the reservoirs and their surroundings clean ²Use carbonic fertilizer instead of chemical fertilizers ²Use local agricultural methods instead of agro chemicals ²Proper disposal of harmful objects into the environment Ex :computer equipment, CFL bulbs, mobile phone batteries ²Proper disposal of garbage ²Encourage garbage recycling projects ²Use decaying garbage for the production of organic fertilizer ²Use loud speakers, radio and other equipment without disturbing others.Our responsibility and duty is to protect the environment and its partners. Hence, our dream of living in a beautiful environment will come true and it will be there for the future generation also.

 Activity 8

1. Select a place in your school that you should develop and give three suggestions on the regular maintenance of that place.2. Get your teacher's advice and the support of the other colleagues on the implementation of your suggestions and their proper maintenance.

84

for free distribution

4.3. Let us preserve the local identity with pride.The following ideas are from the Television discussion held on the topic “Our motherland.” “Sri Lanka is a wonderful country. Our country has a range of climates that we can find all over the world except snow. The crops that grow in any cold country, can be cultivated in Nuwara Eliya. Areas like Jaffna and Mannar, have a warm climate. The other areas have an intermediate climate. There are rivers, water streams, tanks, ponds and also lots of waterfalls in our country.” “In America we cannot find a single green coloured tree until we move 30 kilometers out of New York City. The trees over there also remain green only for half a year. They do not have a sunny day time throughout the year. They cannot believe their eyes when they see our country full of green.” “In some other countries human beings and animals die due to the excessive heat and unbearable cold. But in our country we do not find such unbearable cold or heat. Our climate does not cause harm, but is conducive to life.” “We have banana, papaw, grapes and all the other fruits right throughout the year. Coconut and areca nut are abundant throughout the year. Every moment we hear sweet songs of birds. We cultivate cinnamon, cardamom, cloves, coconut, rubber, cocoa, pepper and betel right through the year. Every forest is a store of medicine. We have inherited a golden land of gems, graphite, ilmenite, phosphate and many other mineral resources. As such we can proudly say that we are born to a prosperous country.” Our ancestors have created many things. These creations have been admired as remarkable creations by the whole world, despite the development of modern technology. After the discussion a song composed by Mahagama Sekara and sung by Visharada W.D.Amaradeva was played and some visuals related to that song were telecast.

85

for free distribution

r;ak§m ckau N+ñ ,xld§m úch N+ñfï wfma Wodr jQ ud;D N+ñhhs ud;D N+ñhhswdÈ isxyf,a - ùr ó uq;=ka f,hska idr jQ Wodr jQ - ud;D N+ñhhs ud;D N+ñhhs

ud‚lH fia fmdf<da .efí ksOdk ù we;af; ta wNS; ¥ mq;=ka cd;sfha kdufhka ix.%du N+ñfha Ôúf;a mqod fy¿E f,a l|hs

.x.d ;rx. rdj § ß§ jkska u,a msmS l=<ska l=f<a yemS.dhkd lrkafka - wdldYfha ke.Sùrhskaf. ta hfYda .S;hhs

iskaOQm udk jeõ ;,d u;ska we§ moau f¾Kqfhka iq.kaO ù rka lr,a kud kud - is;a m%fndaOfhka mqrd tkafk Wka fy¿ m%dK jdhqjhs

86

for free distribution

C»[øP Gß£x |® uõ´ v¸|õk GÈÀ ªS¢u C¯ØøP ÁÍ® {øÓ¢u |¢|õk ©õoUP •zxPÐ® ©õs¦Ö Põm]PÐ® ©ÚøuU PÁº¢vk® |õk

¯õÌ¨£õn® GßÖ ö\õßÚõÀ ÷uß_øÁ FÖ® £øÚÁÍ•® ¦øP°ø»²® JßÓõP ÁÍ¸® P¢uÛß |À¿º Psk PhÀ ÁÍ® {øÓ¯ Esk Pøµ ÁÍ® ö£¸Sx A[S

÷Põ÷nìÁµº ÷Põ°À öPõsh v¸©ø»³›À CµõÁ÷n\ß bõ£P•® Á¸Sx A[÷PPßÛ¯õ öÁ¢}º FØÖ® P»[Pøµ JÎ ÂÍUS® C¯ØøP xøÓ•P¢uõ÷Ú

«ß£õk® ÷uß|õk QÇUQ÷» EskÃµ|Pº ÁßÛ°÷» ÷ÁÍõsø© Esk©k©ø» |õ¯Q²® ©ßÚõ›À £ÁÛ Á¸®©[Põu Põm]²® Esk

~Áöµ¼¯õ ö£õPÁu¢u»õ AØÓß \õª©ø»÷u°ø»¯õ´ ö£õß ÂøÍ²® §®ö£õÈÀ ÷\õø»]ÁöÚõÎ £õu©ø» u»uõ ©õÎøP²®öu›¢vk® ©õ©ø» |õmiÀ

^Q›¯õ ö£õ»|ÖøÁ A~µõ¦µ•®u®¦ÒÍ ÂÀ£zx Pøu £» ö\õÀ¾®P¢uÍõ´ CÛzvk÷u PÀ÷»õ¯õ ©¯UQk÷uPsPÍõÀ Põn AøÇUS÷u

uø»|Pµõ® öPõÊ®¤ß |õP›P•® PskªßªÛ÷¯õ ªÛªÛ÷¯õ Põm]PÒ EskPõnõu ¦xø©PøÍU Põn»õ® ©õ|P›À£õŸº öPõÊ®¦ |Pøµ÷¯

|ßÔ: H.C. ©÷ÚõPµß

87

for free distribution

Ratnadeepa (Island of Gems), Janma Bhoomi ( Country where one in born), Lankadeepa (Island of Lanka), Vijaya Bhoomi (Island of Victory), this is our noble mother country, It is the noble mother country which was fertiled, from the blood shed by our heroic ancestors nourished.

The precious stones that were buried under ground are the bloods of our ancestors who dedicated their lives at the war front. Rivers, blooming silvery flowers are retreating and splashing sings the song of fame of those ancient heroes. The wind that blows kissing the tanks that can be compared to mighty ocean, being fragrant with lotus pollen, bowing of the golden paddy seeds and filling minds with enthusiasm in the breath of life shed by our ancestors.

This is the precious and prosperous land of ours. Our heroes have sacrified their life for our mother land and their blood is the precious treasures buried in the motherland. Even the wind sings the heroic song for the heros who sacrificed their life at the warfront.

88

for free distribution

Fig. 3.7

The standing Buddha statue of Aukana, situated near Kala Veva in Anuradhapura is 39 feet 10 inches high. It is an excellent piece of art. This wonderful creation proves that Sri Lanka had very skillful artists with excellent technical skills to engrave the natural quality to a huge rock, carving it gently with a sharp chissle.We have inherited a number of wonderful creations, such as the Smadhi statue and moonstone in MahameunaUyana in Anurahapura. Apart from the above mentioned Aukana statue, the world heritage site Sigiriya can be considered as a monument of our prestigious history.

Fig. 3.9Fig. 3.8

89

for free distribution

We have evidence to prove that the technical knowledge and skills Sri Lankans possessed of irrigation systems can compete even with modern technology. The tanks built for agricultural and other needs in the dry zone surpass the sea. Kala Veva, Parakrama Samudraya and MinneriyaVeva are the best examples of such massive creations. These wonderful creations are the results of our ancestors’ superb technical skills and labour. The Jaya Ganga is a miraculous creation of irrigation technology which carries water from Kala Veva to ThisaVeva. It is 17 miles in length and 40 feet wide and the slope is 6 inches per a mile. The inheritors of such miraculous creations are none other but we; Sri Lankans. Therefore, our responsibility is to create such national heritages as in the past and preserve them.

We should know our own national identity and should be proud of it as Sri Lankans. Our culture, resources and products speak of our national identity.

Local culture:

● Religions and religious festivals

● Special artistic creations based on religion

Eg: sacred places, statues, dagobas, wall paintings, stone carvings etc.

● Literary works and folklore

● Indigenous medicine local customs

● Irrigation culture, tanks and reservoirs

Fig. 3.10

90

for free distribution

National resources:

²Mineral resources (graphite, gems,

Fig. 3.11

soil, phosphate) ²Wild animals, waterfalls, various types of beautiful flora and fauna ²Different types of grain and vegetables ²Fruits ²Other crops, Natural harbours

Local products:

²Clothes ²Porcelain, roofing tiles,

Fig. 3.12

bricks ²Brass works, wooden works ²Masks ²Reedware ²Food ²Local creations

Now we have identified what our national or local identity is, and through that knowledge we are able to understand the importance of our national identities. First we should identify our own products and appreciate them. Our responsibility is to give priority to our local products.

Importance of appreciating local products and resources

²To be proud of local products

²To be able to make maximum use of local resources

²To be able to start different types of products using local resources that open up paths to new job opportunities

91

for free distribution

²To be able to save money we use on imports

²To be able to produce fresh quality products such as food items

²To be able to identify local resources and start new productions using them

²To be able to buy these products at a low price

²To be able to have faith in the products

²To be able to generate good attitudes regarding local products

We believe that you have identified the importance of appreciating local products in order to stand as one nation. We hope that you will give priority to the preservation of the national heritage we inherited from the past and safeguard it for future generation. This is the duty of every citizen.

Summary

After studying of this chapter, you will be able to inculcate the following qualities as a good citizen.

³Use of polite language ³Respect the ideas of others and come to conclusions through discussion ³Practice discipline and behave well ³Identify the good and bad ³Respect the traditions, rules and regulations ³Economical use of resources ³Protect public property ³Protect the environment ³Appreciate the indigenous products