==== BLOCKS ==== 

Entrepreneurial Studies

Grade 11

Educational Publications Department

To obtain textbooks in electronic mediumwww.edupub.gov.lk

ii

First Print - 2015Second Print - 2016Third Print - 2019

All rights reserved.

ISBN 978-955-25-0321-4

Published by : Educational Publications Department andPrinted by: Savinda Graphic Systems (Pvt) LtdNo. 145, UDA Industrial Estate,Katuwana Road, Homagama.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

v

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along

with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching

process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research

and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related

information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching

process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not

merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher

education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain

learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the

textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum

use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist

you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who

would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as

well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this

textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,

Commissioner General of Educational Publications,

Educational Publications Department,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2019.04.10

vii

Monitoring and Supervision W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General Educational Publications Department. Direction W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department.

Co-ordination U. A. Nalini Senevirathna Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department.

J.W. Rumesh Jayalath Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department. (2019)

Panel of Writers

D. S. Rajapaksha Assitant Director Zonal Education Office, Balangoda

S. A. D. Subasingha Teacher Dharmaraja College, Kandy

M. P. S. R. Perera Lecturer University of Sri Jayawardhanapura

Supuni Liyanagunawardana Lecturer University of Sri Jayawardhanapura

K. Y. J. Somaratna Lecturer University of Sri Jayawardhanapura

M. M. M. Ilyas In Service Adviser Zonal Education Office, Gampaha

C. L. M. Nawas In Service Adviser Zonal Education Office, Ibbagamuwa

M. M. M. Asmi Teacher Raseek Faried M. V. , Karandeniya

viii

Panel of Editors

Rukmal Weerasingha Senior Lecturer University of Sri Jayawardhanapura

Dr. M. D. Pushpakumari Senior Lecturer University of Sri Jayawardhanapura

U. A. Nalini Senevirathna Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Dept.

A. B. Wijesooriya Senior Lecturer National Institute of Education

Proof Reading

W. D. R. L.Fernando Teacher D. S. Senanayaka College, Colombo

Technical Assistance

A. V. Ayesha Dilrukshi Educational Publications Department

ix

Contents

1Business Plan1

2Marketing Plan9

3 Production Plan23

4Administrative Plan29

5Financial Plan37

6Business Organizations61

7Entrepreneurial Culture83

x

For free distribution.1

Chapter 01

Business Plan

This chapter discusses the followings.

1.1 Introduction to a business plan

1.2 Composition of a business plan

1.3 Need for a business plan

For free distribution.2

1.1 Introduction to a business plan

" Failing to plan is planning to fail"

The above statement shows the importance of planning with regard to success in the field of Management. A plan is essential for success in anything. In Grade 10, you studied how to select a business opportunity through various methods of assessment. Now you should prepare to start up and implement your business. In fact, drawing up a plan to transform a business idea into a real business is a main function of an entrepreneur. This chapter will give you a basic understanding of what business plans are.

The following activity will help you check your understanding of business plans.

Activity 01

Read the given statements and indicate whether they are true (a) or false (r).

No.Statementa/ r

01Every person and organization has certain targets to accomplish.

02Every business that is started will be successful.

03The only way to be successful in a business is to put in a lot of money. 04Business plans should be modified according to the changes in the environment. 05If you want to assess how a business is performing, you need a plan. 06In business planning, you cannot be sure of the predictions regarding the external environment.07As the factors of the environment keep on changing, preparing business plans is not necessary.08A plan is necessary to succeed in any goal.

For free distribution.3

Before making a business plan, you should study the business environment well. If you prepare your business plan that way, it would guide you to succeed in your business through using limited resources and suitable strategies. If not, you may not achieve your goals and the resources could be wasted as well.

Your school is an educational institution where various plans are being implemented. You would have seen the Year Planner in the main office of your school. It is a plan that includes the activities scheduled by your school for the relevant year. Your class time table is another example for a plan.

A business plan is a formal document that presents, in a structured and well-organized manner, the targets you expect to reach and the various activities that you will carry out at the start-up of a business and while running the business.

Based on this description, you can verify your answers for the Activity 01.

1.2 Composition of a business plan

There are several elements of a business plan. Out of them, let us focus on the following elements.

Figure 1.2 - Composition of a Business Plan

Executive summary

Marketing plan

Productionplan

Administrative plan

Financial plan

Elements of a business plan

Figure 1.1

For free distribution.4

Let us take a brief look at each of them.

01. Executive summary

The executive summary is a summary of the entire business plan. It summarizes the most important information regarding the business for the benefit of the reader.

When a person reads the executive summary, he/she should be able to create a mental picture of the business based on the information presented there. The executive summary is usually about one page in length.

The following information is summarized in an executive summary:

The name of the business, the industry that it belongs to, etc. (described very briefly) The name of the business that the entrepreneur wishes to start and information regarding the nature of the business.

A summary of the Marketing plan, highlighting its most important points Target customers, expected demand and supply, price of the product, unique features in distribution and promotion, strategies for gaining competitive advantage, etc.

A summary of the Production plan, highlighting its most important points Production process, production cost, unique features of the production process, etc.

A summary of the Administrative plan, highlighting its most important points Administrative structure, administrative processes, etc.

A summary of the Financial plan, highlighting its most important points Funds needed by the business, how the funds will be acquired, expected profitability of the business, etc.

Figure 1.3

For free distribution.5

Uniqueness of the business (described very briefly) How the business organization is different from its competitors in terms of the uniqueness of the product, uniqueness of distribution, etc.

Goals and objectives of presenting the business plan (in brief) Whether the entrepreneur wants to start a new business venture, to get a bank loan to expand an existing business or to manage the future activities in a methodical way through a self-investment should be included.

After the executive summary, the very next page should have a detailed description giving general information regarding the business. It will give information about the business and its owner or owners.

02. Marketing plan

This section details how the sales targets will be achieved. The following forecasted information has to be included here: the goods or service expected to be sold, the demand for the goods or service, marketing strategies, sales expenditure and sales income.

03. Production plan Marketing plan mentions the quantity of goods or service that will be offered to the market. Production plan estimates the cost needs to be incurred when producing that quantity of goods or service.

04. Administrative plan

This section includes information on the human resources required for the business and the related costs.

05. Financial plan

Financial plan gives details regarding the sources of funds. It also includes estimates of income, expenses and profit.

By now, you would have gained a basic understanding about what a business plan is. Next, let us examine why an entrepreneur needs a business plan.

Figure 1.4

For free distribution.6

1.3 Need for a business plan

01. To make the business idea clear A business plan gives details about the proposed goods or service to be offered and its uniqueness, to the persons who are interested of the business.

02. To understand the business environment Business environment keeps on changing all the time. Changes occur in the internal environment of a business, as well as in the external environment including economic, social, political and technological and the natural environment. All of these changes can be identified early through business planning.

03. To guide the business It indicates what activities should be done by each party involved in the business.

04. To indicate the future direction of the business The business plan clarifies what status the business should achieve in future.

05. To raise the necessary funds Investors prefer to put their money into profitable ventures. A business plan displays the proposed activities and expected benefits of the business. A business plan is essential for organizations such as banks when making investment-related decisions.

06. To make a good estimate of the demand The market demand is a main factor determining the success or failure of a business. It is necessary to be well aware of the competitors and substitutes, as well as their market share and strategies; and to form suitable strategies to face them. All of these require planning.

07. To identify the resources required for the business A business plan identifies the physical and human resources necessary for business activities.

Figure 1.5

For free distribution.7

08. To find out the success of the business If you forecast your business activities before starting up the business, you can see what outcome you will be getting by the end of a given period of time. If you have successfully forecasted your business plan, you can understand today whether your business will be a success or a failure in future. This will help you to face future uncertainties successfully.

09. To get an overall image of the business A business plan gives details about the various activities of the business for a given period of time in future. So it provides a clear view of how the business will be in future.

Activity 02

Given below are some details that should be in a business plan. Against each of them, indicate the section of the business plan where it should be included.

Index No.DescriptionSection

01Marketing strategies of the competitors

02Types of employees needed for the business

03Summary of the entire business plan

04Financial needs

05Estimated salary for office employees

06Estimated promotional expenditure

07Minimum qualifications for each type of employee

08Forecasted electricity charges for the factory

09Nature of the business

10Inward and outward financial flow of the business

11Cost of a unit of production

12Location of the business

13Sales forecast

14Targeted sales area

15Annual requirement of raw materials

For free distribution.8

Let’s Answer

01. What do you understand by a “business plan”?

02. Name the elements of a business plan.

03. Indicate the parties that would benefit from a business plan.

04. What are the difficulties that a business may face when there is no business plan?

05. Explain the importance of the executive summary of a business plan.

For free distribution.9

Chapter 02

Marketing Plan

This chapter discusses the followings.

2.1 Introduction to a marketing plan

2.2 Market analysis

2.3 Marketing strategies of the proposed business

2.4 Sales forecast

2.5 Sales income and sales expenses

2.6 Marketing fixed assets

2.7 Preparing a marketing plan

For free distribution.10

2.1 Introduction to a marketing plan

A marketing plan can be identified as the basis of the entire business plan. This is because all other parts of a business plan will be prepared based on the information of the marketing plan, such as customer needs of the target market and quantity of units in demand. The marketing plan explains what goods or service an entrepreneur expects to offer, its potential market and the related marketing strategies. It also includes the projected sales for the product and the sales expenses to be incurred.

Marketing plan is the document that presents the goods or service that is expected to be marketed by an enterprise, its target market, and how the target market will be reached.

The following information is included in a marketing plan:

Market analysis

Marketing strategies of the proposed business

Sales forecast

Sales income and sales expenses

Marketing Fixed Assets

Let us examine each of them briefly.

2.2 Market analysis A market analysis refers to exploring the market in relation to the business. It deeply investigates the demand for the goods or service, the target customers, the nature of the competitors and their marketing strategies, etc. This will help the entrepreneur understand the factors that he/she should consider when deciding on marketing strategies for his/her business.

The main purpose of a market analysis is to get the necessary information to prepare an accurate marketing plan. Therefore, a market analysis is the first step of preparing a marketing plan.

For free distribution.11

Obtaining information for a market analysis

Information needed for a market analysis can be gathered through different means. Given below are some of the methods used often for this purpose:

Distributing questionnaires among customers and getting their responses

Interviewing customers

Observering customers’ transactions in the market

Using sources such as newspapers, magazines, reports, internet etc.

Important factors in a market analysis

1. The demand for the goods or service What the entrepreneur expects to offer to the market may be something that is already available in the market. If not, it could be a modified version of something that is already available, or something entirely new. Whatever it is, it is necessary to examine the customers’ willingness to buy it as well as their ability to buy it.

2. Target customer This refers to the customers who we can expect to buy the product, or who we can expect to be persuaded to buy it in future.

Let us identify the target customer through the following examples:

Goods/ serviceTarget customerExercise books School studentsGold Jewelry LadiesPreparatory material for Grade 5 Scholarship examinationStudents of Grades 4 and 5

Mobile phone repairingMobile phone usersSports goodsSportspersons

An entrepreneur must identify his/her target customer correctly. This can be done in a very specific manner by considering factors such as the customer’s age, income level, gender, occupation, social status, etc.

For free distribution.12

3. Competitors The same kind of goods or services can be offered to the market by many different suppliers. The other suppliers who provide goods or services that are similar to those that we offer are our competitors. There are many varieties of toothpaste, soap, chocolates, telecommunication services, etc available on the market under different brand names, and these are examples for competitive goods and services.

In addition to such homogeneous products, there can be substitute goods/ services as well.

Given below are some examples for substitute goods/ services.

Goods/ ServicesSubstituteLaundry soapLaundry powder (washing powder)ButterMargarineWestern medicineAyurvedic medicineCab servicesThree wheelersTeaCoffee Therefore, when studying competition, it is important that you consider the homogeneous products (i.e. goods and services which are similar to yours), as well as substitute products. In addition, you should pay attention to the marketing strategies used by your competitors.

Activity 01

Select several goods and services available in the market. Write down some homogeneous products and substitute products for each of them.

Goods/ ServiceHomogeneous productsSubstitute products

For free distribution.13

2.3 Marketing strategies of the proposed business

By exploring the market, the entrepreneur can understand the marketing strategies used by the competitors. Then the entrepreneur has to select strategies for his/her own business, so that it can face the competition successfully. Selection of marketing strategies should be based on the marketing mix. There are four main variables of the marketing mix, which are also known as the 4 Ps: Product, Price, Place and Promotion. Given below is a short description of the 4 Ps.

Product Products refer to goods or services offered to the market which can satisfy the customer needs or wants.

This involves information regarding the product such as its content, ingredients, shape, quality, size, brand name, instructions for use, etc.

Price The cost incurred by the customer when obtaining a product is called its price. This is a main factor that determines the demand for the goods as well as the profit earned by the entrepreneur.

Pricing strategies, how the prices are to be set, any discounts to be given etc are considered here.

Place This refers to how the goods or service will reach the target customer. Different strategies can be used to make the goods/service available to the customers. For example, the entrepreneur may sell the goods directly to the customer, or through retail traders. If not, the entrepreneur can sell the goods to the wholesale trader, who sells them to the retail trader, who in turn sells them to the customer.

Out of all such strategies, the most suitable one/s should be considered to make the product available to the customer.

Figure 2.1

For free distribution.14

Promotion Businesses use various strategies to create a demand for their goods or services, to increase the existing demand and to attract the customers. These strategies are called promotion. The following are some possible means of promoting a product.

Television, radio, newspapers, banners, leaflets, posters

Methods involving new technology, such as promotions over Websites, Facebook, etc

Using mobile SMS

Meeting the customers in person

Organizing charity programmes and artistic or cultural events

As described above, the marketing plan should include the promotional strategies for attracting the customers and retaining their loyalty for the product.

2.4 Sales forecast

A sales forecast refers to determining the quantity of goods or services to be marketed within a provided period of time in future. After analyzing the market, the entrepreneur can understand the demand for his/her product within the target market. There may be a large market for the product.

An entrepreneur may not cover the entire market demand at the time of starting up the business. Depending on the strength of his/her business, the entrepreneur can forecast the unit of sales of the market share.

Figure 2.2

Figure 2.3

For free distribution.15

Example :- The demand for a certain product is 15 000 units per week. The current competitors provide only 12 000 units. Therefore, there is a market gap for 3 000 units. It is the new entrepreneur who should decide whether he/she can supply all 3 000 units or only a part of it.

When making a sales forecast, the expected quantity of sales can be calculated per day, per week, per month, per trimester, per year, etc. It would facilitate the decision making. The forecasted market share should be included in the marketing plan.

Activity 02

Indicate a type of good and a type of service that an entrepreneur can offer targeting each of the groups of customers given below:

No.Target marketGoodService01People over 65 years of age02Pre-school children03Women who wish to work in the Middle East04Private bus owners05Students expecting to follow their higher education abroad06Electricians 07Working mothers08Small scale businessmen 09Doctors10Diabetics patients

2.5 Sales income and sales expenses

Sales income

By multiplying the number of units to be sold by the expected selling price, we can calculate the sales income.

Expected sales income

Expected number of units to be sold (goods or service)

Expected selling price of a unit =x

For free distribution.16

Marketing expenses

All expenses incurred in marketing the goods or service are taken under sales expenses. Example :-

Salaries and wages for Marketing managers and staff

Expenses related to sales outlets (if any), such as rental, maintenance, electricity, water, insurance, etc

Office expenses such as telephone charges, stationery, etc Publicity and promotion-related expenses

Depreciation expenses - based on the lifetime of a fixed asset such as sales vehicles, office equipment, a portion of its value should be deducted in the form of an expense. This is called depreciation.

As indicated above, the forecasted data regarding the total sales income and expenditure should be included in the marketing plan.

2.6 Marketing fixed assets

These are the fixed assets that are directly relevant to the sales and distribution activities of the business.

Example :- Land and buildings, machinery, equipment, vehicles, office tools and furniture, etc. which are used in sales and distribution-related activities

Figure 2.4

For free distribution.17

2.7 Preparing a marketing plan

To further clarify the concepts discussed above, let us study a marketing plan prepared for the following scenario.

After having considered a number of business ideas, Akila Jayawardene finally decided to manufacture yoghurt.

He thought of starting the business targeting his own town, Araliya, in Rathnapura. Given below is the information he found from studying the market for yoghurt in the area:

Population in Araliya 40 000 citizens

5% of the population eat yoghurt every day. At present, 75% of the yoghurt sold in the market is dairy yoghurt and 25% is fruit yoghurt.

Details about competitors

Competitor Monthly supply Market shareRajarata yoghurt 12 000 20%Saumya yoghurt 18 000 30%ABC Foods Co. 6 000 10%Healthy Foods Co. 24 000 40% Total 60 000 100%

Marketing strategies used by competitors

Product : offering two varieties, i.e. dairy yoghurt and fruit yoghurt

Price : according to market price

Place : through retail traders

Promotion : displaying name boards carrying the name of the yoghurt at retail shops, displaying posters

For free distribution.18

Akila understood that 50% of the demand for yoghurt in the area was fulfilled by external companies and 50% by two local manufacturers.

Therefore he decided to capture 10% of the market share in the first year of business. The following strategies were selected.

Product: dairy yoghurt and fruit yoghurt

Price : competitive market price

Place : selling through retail traders and restaurants, and selling from the place of manufacture

Promotion: displaying posters at the outlets, offering stickers for children

A three-wheeler worth Rs. 480 000 will be bought to distribute yoghurt.

Other expected expenses are given below:

Annual depreciation of the three-wheeler - Rs. 4 800

Annual insurance premium of the three-wheeler - Rs. 4 800

Monthly fuel and service expenses - Rs. 7 200 Monthly salary for sales staff – Rs. 10 000

Monthly expense for printing posters – Rs. 1 500

Monthly expense for printing stickers – Rs. 2 000

Distribution of yoghurt will take place five days a week. The market price of a cup of yoghurt is Rs. 30. There is no difference in price between dairy yoghurt and fruit yoghurt.

For free distribution.19

Marketing Plan

1. Product Information regarding the proposed product 1' Dairy yoghurt (includes milk, sugar and vanilla) 11' Fruit yoghurt (includes milk, sugar, vanilla, pieces of fruit and jelly)

2. Target group Population of Araliya, Rathnapura. Population is 40 000 citizens.

3. Target sales area Araliya, Rathnapura

4. Market for the proposed product

ProductNo. of target customersPattern of consumption

Monthly demandAnnual demand

QuantityValue

Price x UnitsQuantityValue

1. Dairy yoghurt

2. Fruit yoghurt

1 500(Daily)

500(Daily)

Year-round demand

-do-

45 000(60 000 x 75%)

15 000(60 000 x 25%)60 000

1 350 000

(45 000 x 30)

450 000

1 800 000

540 000

(45 000 x 12)

180 000

720 000

16 200 000

(540 000 x 30)

5 400 000

21 600 000

5. Analysis of supply from competitors

Principal competitors Goods/ services supplied by themTheir market share (approximately)1234

Rajarata IndustriesSaumya IndustriesABC Foods Co.Healthy Foods Co.

Dairy yoghurt/ fruit yoghurt-do--do--do-

20%30%10%40%100%

6. Target market share

ProductExpected market share1. Dairy yoghurt10%2. Fruit yoghurt10%

For free distribution.20

7. Marketing strategies used by competitors

Marketing mix Strategies ProductOffering two varieties, i.e. dairy yoghurt and fruit yoghurt; ensuring the good quality and hygienic nature of the productPriceSetting a competitive pricePlaceDistribution through retail traders PromotionDisplaying name boards carrying the name of the yoghurt at retail shops; displaying posters in the sales area

8. Proposed marketing strategies of the entrepreneur

Marketing mix Strategies ProductOffering two varieties, i.e. dairy yoghurt and fruit yoghurtPriceSetting a competitive pricePlaceThrough retail traders and restaurants; PromotionDisplaying posters at the outlets; offering stickers to attract children

9. Annual sales forecast

Goods/ serviceNo. of units to be sold per monthUnit price Rs.Monthly sales Rs.Annual sales Rs.

Dairy yoghurt 4 50030135 0001 620 000Fruit yoghurt 1 5003045 000540 000

Total 6 000180 0002 160 000

10' Sales expenses

ItemMonthly sales expensesAnnual sales expensesSalary for Sales staffVehicle depreciation Sales vehicle insuranceFuel and service expensesPosters printing expensesStickers printing expenses

10 0004004007 2001 5002 000

120 0004 8004 80086 40018 00024 000Total 21 500258 000

11. Marketing fixed assets

ItemValue Rs.Annual depreciation Rs.

Three-wheeler480 0004 800

For free distribution.21

Activity 03

Sasmitha decided to start a business of manufacturing and selling sweets. She visited several restaurants in the area to find out about the sweets available for sale and the demand for them.

Based on the information given by the restaurant owners, she understood that there were many who manufactured sweets using wheat flour. However, there were only a few who manufactured sweets out of rice flour and kurakkan flour.

Through a market analysis, she understood that a considerable number of people, being diabetic, were starting to use rice flour and kurakkan flour. Given below is some information that she has collected:

Her hometown, Jayagama in Akuressa, has a population of around 80 000 citizens

20% of the population like food made of kurakkan flour and rice flour

They wish to buy sweets at least once in two days

The main competitors and their market shares are as follows:

‘Vimansi Sweets’ – 30% ‘Arundathi Sweets’ – 35%

The marketing strategies of the competitors –

Ensuring the taste and hygienic quality Distributing once per two days and having the unsold items returned to them Displaying sales posters near shops that sell sweets

Sasmitha decided to start up the business covering 25% of the market. She will be using the same marketing strategies as her competitors. In addition, she decided to circulate flyers giving information about her products.

For free distribution.22

At the beginning, she decided to offer rice-and kurakkan-flour-mixed cake and Aluva. Their market price will be as follows:

Cake - Rs. 20 Aluva - Rs. 10

A motorcycle worth Rs. 200 000 will be bought to distribute the products.

Given below are the estimated expenses:

Monthly salary for the employee distributing the products – Rs. 15 000 Insurance (annual) Rs. 3 000 Fuel (monthly) Rs. 10 000 Service charges (monthly) Rs. 1 500 Motorcycle depreciation (annual) Rs. 4 800

Flyers and sales posters will cost Rs. 6 000 per year.

Based on the above information, prepare the marketing plan for ‘Sasmitha Sweets’.

Let’s Answer

01. What is a marketing plan?

02. Name the sections of a marketing plan.

03. Name the 4Ps and describe them briefly.

04. What are the means of collecting information for a market analysis?

05. Explain what do you mean by marketing fixed assets.

For free distribution.23

Chapter 03

Production Plan

This chapter discusses the followings.

3.1 Introduction to a production plan

3.2 Production process

3.3 Production fixed assets

3.4 Production cost

3.5 Unit cost of production

3.6 Preparing a production plan

For free distribution.24

3.1 Introduction to a production plan

A production plan is another important element in a business plan. A production plan is prepared with the aim of calculating the production cost and the cost per one unit of the product.

You have already studied the marketing plan. There, the entrepreneur estimated the quantity of goods or services that he/she expects to sell. The next step is estimating the cost for producing that quantity of goods or services. This requires a production plan.

When producing any good or service, it is necessary to incur a cost. For instance, think of your exercise books. When producing exercise books, you will initially need paper, stapler pins and printed covers. You will also need machinery for cutting up and binding the books. In addition, you need employees to do all the work.

All of these result in some cost. When a large quantity of goods or services is produced, you will need more material and more workers, and the cost will increase as well. Therefore, a proper production plan must be prepared, taking all the expenses into account.

A production plan is the document estimating the cost for a number of production units.

Information included in a production plan

Production process

Production fixed assets

Production cost Material Labour Other costs (Production overheads)

Unit cost

Now let us study these in more detail.

Figure 3.1

For free distribution.25

3.2 Production process

Production process describes how the goods or service will be produced. This includes details on what kind of input will be used, what changes will be made to the input, and what the final product will be. Here, input refers to the resources needed to produce some goods or service.

Let us try to understand the production process through the following example on how to make a cup of tea.

InputProcess of conversionOutput WaterSugarTea leavesMilk powderA teapotA gas burnerGasA cupA jugA strainerA spoonA trayLabour

Put the water in to the kettle and boil

Wash the utensils

Put milk powder and sugar into the jug and mix well

Put the tea leaves into a jug and add boiled water

Strain off the tea leaves to the jug where the milk powder and sugar and stir well

Strain the milk tea into the cup which has been washed

A cup of tea

Similarly, there is a production process for any product, indicating the relationship between the input and the output. This can be displayed as follows:

Inputprocess of conversionoutput

Activity 01

Explain the production process for each of the following:

A wooden table A shirt A brick (made of clay)

For free distribution.26

3.3 Production fixed assets

Buildings, machinery, equipment etc that are used for long term, again and again in the production process are known as production fixed assets.

3.4 Production cost

Production cost refers to the total cost incurred for material, labour and other expenses (production overheads) during the production of a product.

Production cost = material + labour + other expenses

Let us look at each of these separately.

Material and material cost

The input used in producing any good or service is called material. The money spent on the material is the material cost.

In the previous example, water, sugar, tea leaves and milk powder can be considered material, and the cost incurred for them is the material cost.

Labour and labour cost

The process of converting input into output requires human labour. A payment must be made for labour, and this can be identified as labour cost. These payments are called salaries and wages.

Other expenses incurred in production

Apart from the above material and labour costs there are other expenses which are incurred through the production activities. Such expenses can be taken as other expenses incurred in production. In the previous example, if there were an electric bulb lit at the time of making tea, it would also amount to a certain cost. Such general expenses are considered under this category. In addition, based on the lifetime of a fixed asset, a portion of its value should be deducted in the form of an expense. This is called depreciation.

In a manufacturing plant, electricity used for lighting, salary for the security guard, insurance coverage for the plant, depreciation of fixed assets etc are examples for other expenses.

For free distribution.27

3.5 Unit cost of production

When the total production cost is divided by the number of units produced, we get the production cost of one unit.

Total production cost Unit cost of production = Number of units

3.6 Preparing a production plan

To further clarify the concepts discussed above, let us study the production plan prepared for the following case.

Given below is the estimate on production expenditure for the business owned by Maya Randiya. This enterprise manufactures 12 000 cement-and-sand concrete bricks per month.

Monthly expenditure estimate

Cement – 150 bags (Rs. 900 per bag) Sand – 50 cubes (Rs. 6 000 per cube) Lubricant oil – 20 liters (Rs. 50 per liter) Water expense Rs. 3 000 Electricity expense Rs. 3 000 Maintenance Rs. 1 000 Trained labour – 1 person (Rs. 25 000 per month) Untrained labour – 1 person (Rs. 10 000 per month) Machinery depreciation Rs. 2 000

For free distribution.28

Business of Maya RandiyaProduction Plan

ItemMonthly requirementUnit price Rs. Total expenditure

Cement (bags) Sand (cubes)Lubricant oilWaterElectricityMaintenanceTrained labour Untrained labourMachinery depreciation

1505020---0101-

9006 00050---25 00010 000-

135 000300 0001 0003 0003 0001 00025 00010 0002 000Total production cost --480 000

Unit cost 480 000­ ­ − 12 000 40

Activity 02

Given below is the list of daily expenses incurred by “Praneetha Sweets”, which produces 25kg of Kalu Dodol per day. Based on this, calculate the total production cost and the unit cost.

Item Daily requirementUnit price Rs.Total expenditure Rs.

Sugar Rice flour Coconut (large)Cashew nuts, cardamom, etc.Fire wood (bundles)Labour

15 kg20 kg20200 g041

10010050-1001 500

1 5002 0001 0006004001 500

Let’s Answer

01. How would you identify the production plan? 02. What are the parts of a production plan? 03. What are ‘production fixed assets’? 04. Explain the production process using an example. 05. Indicate how to calculate the unit production cost.

For free distribution.29

Chapter 04

Administrative Plan

This chapter discusses the followings.

4.1 Introduction to an administrative plan

4.2 Administrative positions and functions

4.3 Employee salaries and wages

4.4 Other administrative expenses

4.5 Administrative fixed assets

4.6 Preparing an administrative plan

For free distribution.30

4.1 Introduction to an administrative plan

It is difficult for the owner/s of a business to run all the business activities by themselves. Therefore they need various human resources for the business. The administrative plan is the document that contains the information and cost estimates regarding the human resources that a business needs. It also describes the functions, responsibilities and authorities of each person involved in the business.

The following information is included in an administrative plan

Administrative positions and functions

Employee salaries and wages

Other administrative expenditure

Administrative fixed assets

Now let us discuss each of these in detail.

4.2 Administrative positions and functions

A business organization consists of various divisions to handle its different activities related to production, marketing, finance, administration, etc. and there are many positions that come under each of these divisions. It is the administrative plan that gives information on these positions in the business organization: the functions and responsibilities assigned to each position and the qualifications required. An organizational chart can be used to indicate the divisions of a business organization based on its functions, as well as the various positions in the organization and their hierarchy.

Figure 4.2 given below shows the divisions of a business organization based on its basic functions. It is an example for an organizational chart showing the administrative positions of an organization.

Figure 4.2

Managing Director

Production Manager

Marketing Manager

Finance Manager

Human Resources manager

Figure 4.1

For free distribution.31

Figure 4.3 is an organizational chart showing the positions that come under the production division.

Figure 4.3

Machine Operator 4

Production Manager

Supervisor 1

Supervisor 2

Machine Operator 1

Machine Operator 3

Machine Operator 2

In an administrative plan, you can present the various positions, their functions and responsibilities through a table. Given below is an example, showing the functions, responsibilities and qualifications pertaining to the position of an Accountant:

FunctionsResponsibilitiesQualificationsSupervising the purchasing committee

Approving final payments

Signing cheques

Preparing financial statements

Submitting the financial reports on the due date

Being a qualified Chartered Accountant

Activity 01

01. Draw an organizational chart to show the administrative structure of your school.

02. Complete the following table with information pertaining to three positions in your organizational chart.

PositionFunctionsResponsibilitiesQualifications

For free distribution.32

4.3 Employee salaries and wages

The administrative plan should present an estimate of all the payments that will be made to the people holding various positions in the organization. If the owner/s of the business also perform some work and they have to be paid for it, those payments should also be included in the plan.

4.4 Other administrative expenses

Apart from salaries and wages, if there are any other expenses related to the administrative functions of the business, they should be included in the estimate of expenditure.

The following are some examples for expenses which are related to the administrative functions.

Rental for buildings, telephone charges, stationery expenses, maintenance of administrative fixed assets repair and depreciation, office electricity charges, postal charges, etc.

4.5 Administrative fixed assets

There are fixed assets which are directly related to the administrative functions of a business, such as buildings and installations, office equipment, etc. The depreciation of these assets should be calculated based on their value and lifetime, and it should be indicated as an administrative expense.

4.6 Preparing an administrative plan

To further clarify the concepts discussed above, let us study the administrative plan prepared for the following case.

After completing her school education, Geetha Weerasooriya joined a vocational training course where she gained knowledge and training on manufacturing traveling bags. After that, she worked for a short period as a supervisor in a factory manufacturing traveling bags. Having resigned from the job, Geetha wishes to start her own business of manufacturing traveling bags.

She wants to start the business with 10 sewing machines and plans to rent a building in the town. She herself will serve as the General Manager and will claim a salary of Rs. 25 000 per month. In addition to her functions as the General Manager, she will handle the activities related to purchasing and selling. Further, it is she who will cut the material for sewing the bags with.

For free distribution.33

Geetha’s brother who has completed his G. C. E. Advanced Level examination will join her business as an Assistant Manager. She plans to get his help for supervising the other 10 employees and managing the accounts. His proposed salary is Rs. 15 000 per month. The machine operators who have passed the G. C. E. Ordinary Level examination with experience over 06 months will sew the traveling bags.

The following are the expected administrative expenses:

Telephone charges (monthly) Rs. 2000 Stationery expenses (monthly) Rs. 250 Insurance (annual) Rs. 1500

It is expected to buy office equipment worth Rs. 65 000. Annual depreciation of office equipment is considered as 10%.

Administrative Plan

01. Details regarding the entrepreneur:

Entrepreneur : Geetha Weerasooriya

Qualifications : Passed G.C.E. Advanced Level examination Obtained a Certificate in Vocational Training Work experience : Worked as a supervisor in a bags manufacturing factory

02. Organizational chart

General Manager

Assistant Manager

Machine operators (10)

For free distribution.34

03. The main positions in the organization and their responsibilities

PositionFunctionsResponsibilitiesQualificationsGeneral ManagerManaging the business

Purchases

Sales

Cutting the material for the bags

Efficiently managing production, sales and administration of the business

Quality control

G.C.E. Advanced Level

Certificate of voca-tional training

Work experience

Assistant ManagerSupervising the employees

Maintaining the accounts

Ensuring the achievement of production targets

G.C.E. Advanced Level

Machine operatorSewing the traveling bagsMeeting the standards of production

Meeting the production targets

G.C.E. Ordinary Level

Work experience (over 6 months)

04. Administrative expenditure

ItemExpenditure (Monthly) Rs.Expenditure (annual) Rs.Salary for the ManagerSalary for the Assistant ManagerDepreciation of office equipmentInsuranceTelephone chargesStationery charges

25 00015 0006501252 000250

300 000180 0007 8001 50024 0003 000515 000

05. Fixed assets

ItemValue (Rs)Annual depreciation Rs.1st yearOffice equipment65 0007 800

For free distribution.35

Activity 02

Given below are several positions in a garment factory:

1. Production Manager 2. Administrative Officer 3. Finance Manager 4. Marketing Manager 5. Sewing Machine Operator 6. Accounts Clerk

From the list given below, select the qualifications, functions and responsibilities that match each of these positions and complete the table.

Position QualificationsFunctionsResponsibilities 1.2.3.4.5.6.

Qualifications 1. Passed GCE Ordinary Level examination, six months’ work experience 2. Special degree in Marketing 3. Degree in Human Resource Management 4. Degree in Fashion Designing and Product Promotion 5. Chartered Accountant 6. Passed GCE Advanced Level in Commerce stream, passed Stage 1 in a course in Accountancy

Functions 1. Making financial decisions 2. Leading production activities 3. Sewing clothes 4. Maintaining employee files 5. Recording daily transactions 6. Organizing promotional events

For free distribution.36

Responsibilities 1. Ensuring the continuity of production 2. Meeting sales targets 3. Maintaining a motivated work force 4. Meeting daily production targets 5. Recording the transactions correctly 6. Ensuring the financial stability of the organization

Let’s Answer

01. What is an Administrative Plan?

02. What information do you include in an Administrative Plan?

03. List some Administrative Fixed Assets.

04. Name the basic administrative divisions in an organization and indicate the positions that come under them.

05. List several functions of a Production Manager.

For free distribution.37

Chapter 05

Financial Plan

This chapter discusses the followings.

5.1 Introduction to a financial plan

5.2 Activities and expenses to prior to business startup

5.3 Assessment of financial investment

5.4 Statement of expected cash inflows and outflows

5.5 Calculating business results

Overall Business Plan

For free distribution.38

5.1 Introduction to a Financial Plan

You have studied the marketing, production and administrative plans that should be included in a business plan from the previous chapters. This chapter explains the final and the most important part of a business plan, i.e. the financial plan. The forecasted financial requirements and the profitability of the expected business is included in the financial plan.

Further, the money expected to invest in the business, cash inflows and outflows and the daily cash requirements of the business are estimated by a financial plan. Similarly this shows the expected profit calculated considering the forecasted income and expenditure of the business for a specific period.

Financial plan is useful for an entrepreneur due to following reasons.

To decide the amount of funds required for the business

To minimize financial problems

To identify the business result (profit/loss) of the business at the end of a specific period

To assess the adequacy of the above said business result Information included in a financial plan are given below.

Activities and expenses prior to starting the business

An estimation of the total investment

Statement of expected cash inflows and out flows

Calculation of expected business results

Let’s briefly discuss each of these parts.

5.2 Activities and expenses prior to business startup

There are activities to be completed and expenses to be incurred before starting any activity. Similarly, before starting a business, certain activities should be done and expenses should be borne by the entrepreneur. Some such activities and expenses are given below.

For free distribution.39

Expenses on market survey

One of the main things done before starting a new business is studying the market relating to the business. We call this a market survey. Expenses on market survey includes expenses incurred to gather the required data, to analyze them and to prepare reports relating to the expected business.

Examples :- Expenses required to study the consumer needs, competitors, distribution methods of products and service, price for which the product or the service can be sold

Expenditure on improving the business premises

The business premises should be arranged to suit the business before starting the business activities. Expenses that should be incurred with this regard are known as expenditure on improving the place.

Examples :- Installation of electricity, water, internet facility, telephone networks and expenses of land preparation, cleaning and preparing the premises.

Expenditure for searching the raw materials and the equipment

Before starting the business, equipments required to the business should be bought and installed. Similarly, if the business is a production, entrepreneur should search for the methods and institutions to get the raw materials and equipments cost-effectively. Cost incurred to find the information relating to the suppliers (institutions) of the raw materials and equipment, their prices, etc. come under this category.

Examples :- Expenses incurred to visit the suppliers and inspect the materials and equipment, exchange the files and documents, sample inspection

Figure 5.1

For free distribution.40

Registration Expenses

When starting a business it should be registered at authorized institutions. Further, for some businesses, a special approval or licenses should be obtained.

Examples :- A special license should be obtained from the following institutions when starting a business relating to granite quarrying

Central Environmental Authority -Sri Lanka

Department of Archeology

Geological Survey and Mines Bureau

Expenses incurred to register the business and to obtain licenses come under this category.

Other Expenses

All other expenses which are not mentioned above and but are to be incurred when starting a business come under this category.

Examples :- Legal expenses, cost of business plan preparation, expenses for the inauguration ceremony

Figure 5.2

For free distribution.41

Activity 01

Some of the expenses of newly started “Prathiba” business are given below. If they are pre-startup expenses mark (√) and if not mark (×) in the given box.

No.Expense $

01Paid Rs. 25 000 to ABC company for the market survey

02Bought furniture to the office for Rs. 60 000

03Paid Rs. 1 500 for the relevant authority council for licenses

04Paid Rs. 5 000 to clean the buildings

05Cost of preparing the premises to get the electricity supply is Rs. 4 000

06Charge to lay cables for the computer network Rs. 8 000

07Bought 10 computers for Rs. 800 000

08Paid for the preparation of business plan- Rs. 20 000

09Expenses for entertainment on the starting day of the businessRs. 8 500

10Expenses for exchanging information with the suppliers Rs. 1 000

5.3 An estimation of the total investment

It is important for an entrepreneur to identify the required investment of the expected business in advance. A total investment estimate is prepared for this purpose. Sometimes this is known as “cost of the project”.

For free distribution.42

Contents of a total investment estimate

The total investment estimate of a business plan consists with the following elements.

Value of the fixed assets Expenses that should be incurred prior to business startup Initial funds required to conduct the day to day business activities (working capital) Value of the fixed assets

Fixed assets like land, buildings, machineries, equipments, vehicles and furniture are required to conduct business activities. These assets can be utilized for future years in the business. Here all long-term assets and their values that are included in the production, marketing and administrative plans mentioned earlier are considered as fixed assets of the business.

Expenses that should be incurred prior to business startup

We have studied the expenses that should be incurred prior to business startup in the section 5.2 above. All those expenses are taken in to consideration when preparing the total investment estimate.

Expenses required to conduct the day to day business activities

Entrepreneur should possess an adequate amount of funds at the beginning of the business in order to conduct the business activities continuously and smoothly. The amount of cash required to conduct the day to day business activities are also known as working capital.

When deciding the initial working capital requirement of the business, it is necessary to calculate the production, marketing and administrative expenses that are required from the beginning of the business activities till cash flows in to the business.

Such working capital is estimated based on funds required for all expenses for the above said period including materials, employee salaries, water, telephone, advertising, distribution, rental and interest should be calculated.

It is unfavorable for a business to have an excessive working capital or a deficit and should maintain on an optimum level. If adequate working capital is not available within the business, the smooth and continuous flow of business activities will be disrupted.

For free distribution.43

Examples :- If enough cash is not available to buy the raw materials in due time, the business will not be able to do its production. As a result, all the business activities will be stagnated and delayed and business will generate losses. The disadvantage of maintaining a working capital surplus is the loss of income that can be earned by investing those money in another investment.

Having to pay a higher interest or comply with disadvantageous conditions when getting money instantly for a certain requirement could arise due to a working capital deficit.

After deciding the value of fixed assets, pre-startup costs and working capital requirement, it is necessary to decide whether the business is going to cover those requirements through the owners’ investments or funds acquired from external parties.

Study how a total investment estimate is prepared through the following exercise.

Information relating to the business plan prepared for the business “Wardhana Exercise Books” of Mr. Sarath Siriwardene is given below.

Cost estimations Rs. Buying a paper cutting machine 150 000 Business registration fee 1 500 Preparing the premises to obtain an electricity supply 25 000 For office furniture 80 000 Buying a computer to the office 65 000 Buying a vehicle for sales and distribution 1 500 000 Buying a fax machine 15 000 Cost of preparing the business plan 22 000 Expenses for the inauguration day ceremony 15 200 Market survey expenses 18 000

For free distribution.44

The building which is expected to be used as the production center belongs to Mr. Sarath Siriwardene and its value is Rs. 2 000 000.

It has been suggested to get a bank loan of Rs. 1 000 000 to buy the sales vehicle.

It is estimated that an amount of cash sufficient for two weeks is required to run the business activities and the amount is estimated to be Rs. 350 000.

“Wardhana Exercise Books”Estimation of Total Investment

Proposed investmentTotal investmentRs.

Provided by the ownerRs. Bank loan Rs.

Fixed Assets Building Sales vehicle Office furniture Computer Fax machine Paper cutting machine

2 000 000500 00080 00065 00015 000150 000

1 000 000 - - -

2 000 0001 500 00080 00065 00015 000150 000A. Total Fixed Assets2 810 0001 000 0003 810 000Pre-startup Expenses Market survey expenses Business registration fee To obtain the electricity supply Preparing the business plan Inauguration ceremony

18 0001 50025 00022 00015 200

- - - - -

18 0001 50025 00022 00015 200

B. Total pre-startup expenses81 700 -81 700

Working capital for business activities 350 000 350 000

C. Total working capital requirement350 000-350 000

Total investment (A+B+C)3 241 7001 000 0004 241 700

For free distribution.45

Accordingly, Mr. Sarath Siriwardene requires Rs. 4 241 700 as the total investment. Out of that Rs. 1 000 000 will be obtained as a bank loan. Owner’s building which is worth Rs. 2 000 000 will be given to the business and Rs. 1 241 700 will be invested from his personal money.

Activity 02 Some of the information of the proposed garment factory of Mr. Muhammad Iththikar is given below. Based on the information, prepare the total investment plan for “Iththikar Garments”.

Item Cost (Rs.) To buy 10 sewing machines 400 000 To obtain electricity to the building 25 000 To get the telephone supply 23 000 To buy office equipments 63 000 Market survey expenses 4 500 To buy a cloth cutting machine 200 000 To fix the water supply 11 000 To prepare the business plan 15 000

It is expected to use the building which belongs to Mr. Muhammad as the business premises. The value of the building is Rs. 1 800 000.

Further he intends to provide 05 sewing machines which are already with him to the business. The total value of the machines are Rs. 200 000.

He expects to obtain a bank loan of Rs. 600 000 to buy additional new 5 sewing machines and the cloth cutting machine.

Cash in hand required to conduct the daily business activities should be Rs. 400 000.

For free distribution.46

5.4 Statement of forecasted (budgeted) cash inflows and cash outflows Statement that is prepared including the proposed cash inflows to and outflows from the business during a specific future period is known as statement of forecasted (budgeted) cash inflows and cash outflows. The amount of cash available within a business at the end of a certain period can be calculated by preparing this statement. This shows the cash inflows to the business and outflows from the business during a specific future period and the cash balance at the end of that specific period. Cash inflows

Following are recorded as cash inflows of a business.

Capital invested by the owners

Obtaining bank loans

Receiving cash from cash sales

Receiving cash from debtors

Income received by hiring buildings or other assets

Investment income and interest received by investing the money of the business and any other inflow of cash into the business

Cash outflows

The cash outflows of a business is determined based on the cost estimations included in the production, marketing, administrative and financial plans of the business. Accordingly few reasons for the outflow of cash from the business are given below.

Buying fixed assets

Buying inventories of raw materials or merchandise

Paying for electricity, telephone, insurance, transportation, rental, and employee salaries

Payments for the creditors

Paying loan installments and interest

Paying taxes

For free distribution.47

Cash balance

The difference between the cash inflows and outflows during a specific period or the balance available at the end of the said specific period is known as cash balance.

Study how a forecasted cash inflow and outflow statement (forecasted cash flow statement) of a business is prepared for a future year.

Examples :- Some of the forecasted information for the next year extracted from the business plan of Bhasitha’s business who expects to start a stationary shop are given below. Rs.

Bhasitha’s money invested in the business 1 000 000

Expected sales revenue 3 000 000

Obtaining bank loans 500 000

Paying building rental 120 000

For the electricity bill 12 000

Payment for the creditors 18 000

Paying employee salaries 300 000

Obtaining trade inventories 2 300 000

Paying loan installments and interests 228 200

Buying 08 glass cupboards 300 000

Fixing bookshelves 250 000

Buying office equipment 60 000

Incurring pre-operational expenses 48 000

Receiving cash from debtors 100 000

Figure 5.3

For free distribution.48

Basitha’s business Forecasted cash flow statement for the first year

DescriptionRs.Rs.Cash inflows Owner’s investment Bank loans Expected sales revenue From debtorsTotal cash inflows

Cash outflows Building rental Electricity bill Paying creditors Employee salaries Obtaining trade inventories Loan installments and interest payments Buying 08 glass cupboards Fixing bookshelves Buying office equipments Pre-operational expenses Total cash outflowsCash balance at the end of the period

1 000 000 500 0003 000 000100 000

120 000 12 000 18 000 300 0002 300 000 228 200 300 000250 000 60 000 48 000

4 600 000

3 636 200963 800

For free distribution.49

Activity 03

Following are the information extracted from the business plan of Roshitha’s business for the following year. Based on the information prepare the forecasted cash flow statement. Show the cash balance at the end of the year.

Description Rs. Money invested by the owner 500 000 Bank loan obtained 250 000 Sales revenue 1 860 000 Buying equipments 120 000 Buying tables and chairs 300 000 Expenses for decorating the office 60 000 Cost of business plan preparation 5 000 Buying goods for sale 1 100 000 To pay the electricity bills 20 000 To pay the water bills 25 000 To pay the loan installments 55 000 Business registration fee 1 500

5.5 Calculating the business results

By conducting a business an entrepreneur expects to earn profits. If the profit of the business at the end of a specific period is to be identified at present, such expected profit should be forecasted by considering the expected income and expenses.

The forecasted income statement included in the financial plan (a main component of a business plan) fulfills the above requirement of the entrepreneur.

The forecasted income statement includes the following things.

Estimated total income

Estimated total expenses

Expected business result

For free distribution.50

Estimated total income

The total value of the products or services expected to be sold by a business during a specific period of time is known as estimated sales income. Both the cash sales and the credit sales should be considered here. Similarly, if there are other income, a business expects to earn, they should also be included here. Accordingly, the total expected income includes the sales income and other income expected to be earned during the period. Estimated total expenses

All the expenses expected to incur for the products and services which are to expected to be sold during a specific period of time is known as estimated totalexpenses. When calculating this expenditure, production cost and non-production cost should be stated separately.

Production cost

Expenses that directly contribute to the production of the business come under this category. When calculating the production cost following cost should be considered. Material cost Labour cost Other costs (overhead cost)

Non production cost

Expenses that do not directly relate to the production activities of the business come under this category. They are;

Selling and distribution expenses included in the marketing plan Administrative expenses included in the administrative plan Financial expenses included in the financial plan (e.g. loan interest)

Expected business result

Expected business result can be calculated by deducting the estimated total expenses from the expected total income. This can be a profit or a loss. The decision to start the business can be made, if the result is a profit and if the investor is satisfied that the profit is adequate for the money invested.

Figure 5.4

For free distribution.51

If the result is a loss, it guides the entrepreneur to make a decision on starting the business.

Study how a statement is prepared that calculates the end result of a business for a future year

Examples :- Let’s calculate the final or the end result of the below mentioned business - “Sirisara Confectionary” for its first year by using the information available in the business plan.

Item Value Rs.

Sales incomeRaw material costLabour costOther production costSelling and distribution expensesAdministrative expensesFinancial expenses (loan interest)

3 000 0001 500 000300 000285 00060 00072 00024 000

“Sirisara Confectionary”Statement of expected end result calculation for the first year

Rs.Rs.

Sales income

Less - Total production cost Raw material cost Labour cost Other production cost Less - Total non-production cost Selling and distribution expenses Administrative expenses Financial expenses

1 500 000 300 000 285 000

60 000 72 000 24 000

3 000 000

(2 085 000)

(156 000)Net Profit 759 000

Accordingly the entrepreneur of “Sirisara Confectionary” expects to earn a net profit of Rs. 759 000 by the business operations in the first year.

For free distribution.52

Activity 04

Amal Fernando expects to start a business which sells ornamental plants. Some of the information extracted from the business plan prepared for his nursery are given below. Based on the information provided, calculate the expected result of Amal Fernando’s business.

Item Rs.

Expected sales incomeRaw material costLabour cost Other production expensesSelling expensesAdministrative expensesFinancial expenses

1 800 000320 000360 000220 00048 00036 00024 000

For free distribution.53

Overall business plan

By now you have studied the marketing plan, production plan, administrative plan and financial plan which are the elements of a business plan. Using the data of those plans, a business prepares the overall business plan.

Study how an overall business plan is prepared according to a simplified format using the description given below.

Udara Leather Products

Udara Maduwanthi who lives in Sandhaeliya -Anuradhapura decided to start a business which produces purses unique to each school containing the colors of the school and their badges.

She decided to start the production activities targeting the area where she lives at first. The market survey conducted by her revealed that there are approximately 60,000 students in the area and nearly 50% of them are female students. Further it was found that every female student buy at least one purse for a year.

Moreover, it was identified that sellers of school items sell different types of purses for competitive prices from Rs. 100-Rs. 200. Sellers have introduced purses which contain stickers of different kinds of pictures to attract the minds of the students.

Details of the competitors are as follows.

CompetitorProductMarket shareMalki school equipmentsPurse60%Sisira school equipmentsPurse40%

The estimated raw material cost of a purse is as follows.

Rs. For artificial leather 25 For other components 7 To sew the badges (logos) 20 52

For free distribution.54

It was decided to recruit a girl with G.C.E. A/L and of 05 years working experience to cut the blocks of leather for the purses and to keep her in the position of foreman. Her monthly salary is Rs. 20 000. She is responsible to supervise the production process.

Further it is expected to recruit two female machine operators with G.C.E .O/L and 06 months working experience for a monthly salary of Rs. 15 000.

Getting orders, marketing and management activities are planned to be done by Udara herself. She expects to get a monthly salary of Rs. 25 000 for that.

Other expected monthly expenses are as follows. Rs. Factory electricity 2 500 Telephone charges 1 200 Transportation expenses 5 000

A three wheeler should be bought for Rs. 360 000 to bring the raw materials and to deliver the products. The expected life time of the three wheeler is ten years. Two sewing machines will be bought for Rs. 60 000 each to sew the purses and their useful life is estimated to be 05 years.

It is proposed to use her own building which worth Rs. 1 000 000 as the production Centre. A loan of Rs. 500 000 is expected to be obtained from the Entrepreneurship Development Bank under 10% annual interest and the repayment period is 05 years. The loan installment for the first year is Rs. 120 000.

Following expenses are expected to be incurred before the business start-up. Rs. Registration fee 1 200 For electricity 7 000 Inauguration day expenses 5 000

Working capital requirement is estimated as Rs. 75 000.

Products will be available for sale at school sales shops and a purse is given to a shop for Rs. 170. It is expected to sell the purses to 50% of the students with in the first year.

For free distribution.55

Business Plan

1. Executive Summary

1.1 Business name and Industry :-

1.2 Most important points of the marketing plan :-

1.3 Most important points of the production plan :-

1.4 Most important points of the administrative plan :-

1.5 Most important points of the financial plan :-

1.6 Specialty or the uniqueness of the business :-

1.7 Goals and objectives of preparing and presenting the business plan :-

2. Marketing Plan

2.1 The product

2.2 Target buyers

2.3 Target market area

2.4 Market relating to the expected product

ProductNumber of target consumersConsump-tion patternMonthly demandAnnual demand

QuantityValue Rs.Quantity Value Rs.

For free distribution.56

2.5 Supply analysis of the competitors

Main competitorsProducts and services suppliedApproximate market share of the competitors

2.6 Target market share

Product or serviceExisting market sharePlanned market share

2.7 Marketing strategies of the competitors

Marketing mixStrategies

Product

Price

Place

Promotion

For free distribution.57

2.8 Proposed marketing strategies of the entrepreneur

Marketing mixStrategies

Product

Price

Place

Promotion

2.9 Forecasted annual sales

ProductExpected monthly sales (quantity)

Unit price Rs.

Average monthly sales value Rs.

Annual sales value Rs.

2.10 Marketing expenses

ItemAverage monthly selling expenses Rs.Annual selling expenses Rs.

2.11 Marketing Fixed assets

ItemValue RsAnnual depreciation Rs.1st year

For free distribution.58

03. Production plan

3.1 Calculation of total production cost

ItemMonthly requirementUnit price Rs.Total expenditure Rs.

Total production expenditureUnit cost

3.2 Production Fixed assets

ItemValue Rs.Annual depreciation Rs.1st year

04. Administrative plan

4.1 Details of the entrepreneurs

Name of the entrepreneur :- …………………………………….. Address :- …………………………………….. Qualifications :- ……………………………………..

4.2 Organizational structure Main positions and responsibilities of the organizational structure

PositionFunctionResponsibilitiesQualifications

For free distribution.59

4.3 Administrative expenses

ItemExpenses (monthly) Rs.Expenses (Annual) Rs.

4.4 Administrative Fixed assets

ItemValue (Rs)Annual depreciation Rs.1st year

05. Financial plan

5.1 Pre–startup activities and cost

Pre–startup activitiesExpenses Rs.

5.2 Total Investment Estimate

Proposed investmentTotal InvestmentRs.Provided by the owner Rs.Bank loans Rs.Fixed Assets

Total fixed assets (A)

Pre-startup cost

Total pre-startup cost (B)

Working capital

Total working capital requirement (C)

Total investment (A+B+C)

For free distribution.60

5.3 Estimated (budgeted) cash flow statement

Rs.Rs.Cash inflows Less - Cash out flows Cash balance at the end of the period

5.4 Statement of expected result calculation

Rs.Rs.Sales incomeLess – Total production cost

Less - Total non- production cost

Net profit

Let’s Answer

01. What is a financial plan?

02. Give examples for pre-startup expenses.

03. State the items that are included in an investment estimate.

04. Provide some examples for cash inflows and cash outflows of the business?

05. Provide some examples that are included in an estimated cash flow statement?

For free distribution.61

Chapter 06

Business Organizations

This chapter discusses the followings.

6.1 Introduction to business organizations 6.2 Classification of business organizations 6.3 Sole proprietorships 6.4 Partnerships 6.5 Incorporated companies

Franchises

For free distribution.62

6.1 Introduction to business organizations

You have already gained a good understanding about the preparation of business plans. The next step is selecting a suitable type of business organization in order to implement the plan. This chapter aims to give you the required guidance with this regard. At present different businesses help people to satisfy their needs and wants. Accordingly, businesses are related with all daily activities of people. The influence of businesses can be seen not only when we fulfill our daily requirements like foods and clothes, but also when satisfying our all other day today needs and wants.

Example :- Products like books, pens and pencils that you use

Different organizations that provide the services like banking and insurance

Activity 01

Name some of the day to day wants of your home and state the business organizations that help to satisfy them.

No.WantBusiness organization

01.

02.

03.

04.

05.

After doing the above activity, you can understand that it is necessary to get the assistance of different parties in order to fulfill your needs and wants and you are clear that business organizations are behind all these activities. To start and run businesses, individuals should organize as groups. Thus, units comprise of group of people working together for the purpose of achieving a common goal are called organizations. Accordingly, different business organizations have been established at present in order to satisfy the needs and wants of people.

For free distribution.63

Entities that engage in production and distribution of goods and services with the aim of earning profits, achieving social wellbeing or fulfilling any other objective while using limited resources to satisfy human needs and wants are called business organizations.

Some of the common characteristics that can be seen in every business organization are given below.

Having an objective

Using limited resources

Having an organizational structure

Engaging in an economic activity

Having a group of people who work together (owners, employees etc.)

6.2 Classification of business organizations

Today different business organizations have been established to supply goods and services for the purpose of satisfying needs and wants of people.

These different types of business organizations can be classified based on different criteria. Here, we consider only the following criteria which are often used.

Ownership

Objective

Classification of business organizations based on ownership

The ownership of the business is explained based on the way the financial resources are provided to start the business. Parties that deploy resources in the business are called owners. Owners enjoy the profits or losses earned by a business.

Based on ownership, business organizations are classified as follows.

Private sector businesses

Public sector businesses

For free distribution.64

When financial resources are deployed in a business by an individual or group of individuals, the ownership of the business is with the private sector. Then they are called private sector businesses.

Similarly when the financial resources are provided by the government, the ownership is with the government and they are called public sector organizations.

Classification of businesses based on the ownership is given below.

Business organizations

Private sector businesses

Public sector businesses

Examples :- Sole proprietorships Partnerships Incorporated companies

Examples :- Departments State corperations State companies

Figure 6.1: Classification of businesses based on ownership

Classification of business organizations based on their objectives

Entrepreneurs conduct businesses with the aim of achieving different objectives. Businesses can be classified as follows based on their objectives

Profit oriented businesses Not-for profit organizations

If a business is carried out by an entrepreneur with the objective of gaining profit, such businesses are called profit oriented business organizations.

Examples :- Private hospitals Private banks Super markets Garment firms

For free distribution.65

Similarly, the objective of some businesses is not to earn profits but to provide benefits to the society. Such organizations are called not-for profit organizations.

Examples :- Red Cross Society Lions club Sarvodaya Sports clubs

Profit oriented businesses and not-for profit organizations are operating under both the private and the public sectors. Figure 6.2 depicts how the business organizations are classified based on the objective.

Business Organizations

Profit oriented businesses

Not-for profit organizations

Figure 6.2: Classification of businesses based on the objective

Activity 02

State few organizations from which you fulfill your daily needs and fill the following table relating to those organizations.

No.OrganizationObjectiveOwnership

01Super marketProfitPrivate 02030405

For free distribution.66

After learning the above information, we hope that you have understood that businesses can be classified based on different criteria. An entrepreneur should be clever enough to select the most suitable type of business organization among these different types of business organization.

We discuss only the following types of business organizations which are classified based on ownership.

Sole proprietorships Partnerships Incorporated companies

6.3 Sole proprietorships

At present sole proprietorships can be identified as one of the most common business types that many entrepreneurs start. These are also known as single owner businesses. Since entrepreneurs can easily start these businesses with a small amount of capital, they can be seen in almost all the countries in the world.

A business started, owned and run solely by the owner is known as a sole proprietorship.

Main characteristics of sole proprietorship.

Some of the main characteristics of sole proprietorships are given below.

Capital is provided by the owner

An initial capital is required to get the different resources that are required to start the business. Investing the capital solely by the owner is a characteristic of sole proprietorships. Capital can be found through different ways including owners’ savings, funds given by relatives or friends, a loan obtained by selling or mortgaging his/ her assets or a loan taken from a financial institution.

Figure 6.3

For free distribution.67

Ownership rests with a single person

Since capital required for the business is invested by a single person, the ownership too is with that person.

Profits or losses are borne alone

The profit earned by the business belongs to the owner. Similarly, if the business incurs losses, that should be borne by the owner alone.

No continued existence

The continuity of the business can stop due to such reasons as death of the owner, insanity or any other passivity.

Unlimited liability of the owner

Liability means the obligations to repay the loans and other advances obtained from external parties. In sole proprietorships, liability of the owner is unlimited. this means that even the private properties of the entrepreneur may have to be sacrificed to settle the liabilities of the business.

Registration is not mandatory

It is not mandatory to register a sole proprietorship. Yet registration of the business is very useful. If it is registered, it will be registration of the business name. The business name will be registered under the Business Name Registration Ordinance, No.06 of 1918 at the divisional secretariat of the respective provincial council.

No legal personality

This means that a sole proprietorship cannot conduct any legal operations by its own business name. If required to do so, it should be done by the name of the owner.

Examples :- Filing legal cases, obtaining bank loans, purchasing of vehicles should be done not by the name of the business but by the name of the owner.

For free distribution.68

Business can solely be led at owner’s discretion

Examples :- Hiring and firing of employees Expanding the business operations Making decisions regarding the price of the products

Starting Sole Proprietorships

Though starting a sole proprietorship is easy, there are few steps which should be followed practically by an entrepreneur. They are given below.

Obtaining the following applications from the Divisional Secretariat from the respective division where the business is expected to be started.

1. An application form to register the business name of a sole proprietorship

2. An application form to obtain the required report from Grama Niladharee regarding the registration of the business name

Handing over the certified report of the Grama Niladharee and the duly completed application form along with the registration fee to the Divisional Secretary.

After receiving the above documents along with the due payments, Divisional Secretary will consider them, and if satisfied will register the business and issue the Certificate of Registration of Business Name.

Activity 03

Obtain the forms required to start a sole proprietorship.

01. Observe the facts which have been requested in these forms.

02. Discuss with your friends and gather data required to fill these forms.

Advantages of sole proprietorships

Can be started with a small amount of capital

Can get the assistance of the members of the family

Convenience of starting

Can make independent decisions

For free distribution.69

Ability to improve the business with the dedication and the enthusiasm of the entrepreneur

All the profits belong to the owner

Privacy of the business information is secured

Impact of rules and regulations is minimal

Limitations of sole proprietorships

Sources to get the required capital are limited

No separate legal identity

Unlimited liability of the owner

No continuous existence

Losses should be solely borne by the owner

Individual decisions of the owner may be unsuccessful

Activity 04

Saman started a business enterprise using a small amount of money he had saved. He was happy as he didn’t have to make much effort and spend much time for the initial activities in the establishment of the business. He was committed to the business and worked hard.

Though different difficulties arose, he gave quick solutions to them converting the issues in to his experiences and conducted the business activities continuously. Once Saman had to appear before the courts as a customer filed a case against one of his employees for a mistake done by the employee. However, Saman was able to continue with his plans and run the business profitably.

Though Saman wanted to improve his business further, he realized that obtaining the required additional capital is difficult. Even though there was the possibility of obtaining bank loans further, he was not interested to do so since there was the risk of settling them.

Though Saman got sick due to the heavy work load of the business, he always tried his best to carry on the business activities successfully.

01. To which category does the above business belongs to?

02. Give benefits and limitations of that type of business organization.

For free distribution.70

Partnerships too have received an important place in the economy as a type of a private sector business organization. The ability of entrepreneurs to engage in business activities together than individually has been a major reason for the establishment of partnerships. Similarly partnerships have emerged owing to the requirements of getting more capital, making right management decisions, getting the involvement of individuals with different skills, etc. It can be seen that people who are engaged in the professional fields such as accounting, law, tax and medicine and the parties who do production and trade organize as partnerships.

Partnership Ordinance of 1980 affects the partnerships conducted in Sri Lanka. According to this Ordinance, partnerships are defined as follows.

A relationship between two or more individuals with the objective of earning profits is known as a partnership.

Main characteristics of partnerships

Special characteristics of a partnership are given bellow.

Number of partners

In order to start a partnership there should be minimum of two partners and the maximum number is limited to 20.

Existence of an agreed (stipulated) relationship among partners

A partnership is started according to the agreement arrived by the partners. This agreement can be written, oral or implied. The agreement among the partners regarding the partnership is known as the partnership agreement.

No continued existence

The continuity of the partnership is obstructed due to the change of the partnership agreement or due to the death, insanity or bankruptcy of a partner.

Figure 6.4

6.4 Partnerships

For free distribution.71

Unlimited liability of the partners

Partners are unlimitedly liable for the liabilities of the partnership. Accordingly, partners may have to sacrifice their private properties to pay off the debt of the partnership if the assets of the partnership are not sufficient when settling its liabilities.

No separate legal identity

Since a partnership is not considered as a legal person before the law, it cannot perform legal activities in its business name. Hence, the legal matters of the partnership should be done not in its business name but using the personal names of the partners.

Not mandatory to register a partnership

It is not mandatory to register a partnership. Yet many advantages can be obtained by registering a partnership. Here the business name of the partnership will be registered. Registration can be done under the Business Name Registration Ordinance, No 06 of 1918 at the Divisional Secretariat of the respective provincial council.

Every partner will be a representative (or an agent) of other partners

Every partner is liable for the affairs done by each partner. Hence, every partner is considered as a representative of other partners.

Starting a partnership

A partnership can be started in the same way as a sole proprietorship. Yet, since there may be a maximum up to 20 partners, it might face different practical issues when running the business. Though a partnership agreement can be arrived at in writing, orally or by implication (implied), it is more suitable to conduct the partnership on a written agreement.

This written agreement is known as the partnership deed. It is important to have the stipulated agreement in writing in order to minimize the practical issues that may arise in a partnership when doing business.

Figure 6.5

For free distribution.72

Some of the factors included in a partnership agreement are given below.

The method of capital contribution by the partners

The way of sharing profits and losses

The way how the partners contribute to the affairs of the business

Paying salaries to the partners

Obligations and rights of partners

Information relating to ceasing / dissolving the partnership

Arrangement of paying interest to the partners for the loans given to the business other than the capital

Other common agreements regarding the conduct of the partnership

Advantages of partnerships

Convenience of commencing

Can raise more capital

Can take collective decisions

Liabilities are shared among the partners

Can utilize different skills of the partners

Limitations of partnerships

Unlimited liability

No separate legal identity

Possibility of arising conflicts among partners

Profits being shared among partners

No continued existence

Consequences of a mistake done by a partner can affect other partners

For free distribution.73

Activity 05

Amal Piyarathne and Kamal Jayarathne started a partnership to sell garments and agreed to register it under the name of “Rathna Dress”. Further they agreed to put Rs 50,000 by each and to equally share the profits and losses of the business. Kamal decided not to engage in business activities since he was doing another job and it was agreed that Amal should attend to the marketing affairs of the business for a monthly salary of Rs. 20,000. Moreover, they decided to pay an annual interest of 10% for the extra funds invested in the business other than the capital. Similarly they decided that in case if a new partner joins the business, it should be done with the consent of both partners.

Prepare a partnership deed for the partnership, “Rathna Dress” according to the above information.

6.5 Incorporated companies

Incorporated companies can be identified as a popular form of business organization which mainly represents the private sector category. Companies Act No. 07 of 2007 of Sri Lanka affects the commencement of an incorporated company.

Since even a single person can start an incorporated company according to the Companies Act of Sri Lanka, most of the entrepreneurs are interested in starting this type of businesses. Receiving the status of a legal personality is another reason for the popularity of incorporated companies.

An incorporated company can simply be defined as follows.

Incorporated companies are business organizations which are registered under the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007 and which have a separate legal identity and a continued existence.

Characteristics of incorporated companies

Some of the basic characteristics of incorporated companies are given below.

For free distribution.74

Incorporated under the Companies Act

Every company should be registered under the Companies Act No. 07 of 2007. It is done by the Registrar of Companies of the Department of Registrar of Companies.

Raising capital through shareholders

The capital required for an incorporated company is raised by issuing shares.

Limited liability of the shareholders

In an incorporated company, the liability of the shareholders regarding liabilities is limited. This means that the liability of the shareholders is limited to the value of the shares they had bought from the company.

Management of the company is done by directors

The management of a company is done by directors selected and appointed by the company shareholders who are the owners of the company too.

Having a continued existence

An incorporated company is a separate entity from its owners. Hence the death, bankruptcy or full or half passivity of a shareholder does not obstruct the continuation of the company.

Have a separate legal personality

Companies are incorporated under the Companies Act No 07 of 2007. Hence, an incorporated company is considered as a legal person and entering in to contracts, acquiring assets, obtaining loans from financial institutions etc., can be done in the name of the company.

For free distribution.75

Types of companies which can be started according to the Companies Act No 07 of 2007 are given below in the figure 6.6.

Figure 6.6 Types of companies

Incorporated companies

Limited by guarantee

Limited companies

Unlimited companies

Private limited companies

Public limited companies

Offshore limited companies

According to the Companies Act, different types of companies can be started. Only private limited companies are discussed here. Most of the small and medium sized entrepreneurs prefer private limited companies for their businesses.

Private limited companies

Private limited companies can be identified as a business organization which is popular among the Sri Lankan entrepreneurs at present. Ability of even a single person to start, having a legal personality, ability to get the involvement of family members, friends and relatives, etc., for the commencement are the main reasons for this popularity.

Companies Act of No. 07 of 2007 has given a definition to private limited companies and it can be stated as follows.

Companies of which the number of shareholders are limited to 50, shares cannot be offered to the public and, liability is limited are known as private limited companies.

For free distribution.76

Activity 06

List private limited companies that operate in each of the following fields in Sri Lanka.

No.FieldPrivate companies01.Tourism 02.Education03.Trade04.Manufacturing 05.Agriculture06.Construction

Starting a private limited company

To start and conduct a private limited company, it should be registered under the Companies Act No 07 of 2007. For the registration, following four documents should be submitted to the Registrar of Companies along with the application form.

01. Statement regarding the name of the company

Companies Act of No.07 of 2007 includes provisions that should be followed when selecting a name for a limited company.

Examples :- A name that is identical or similar to a name currently in use should not be used as the name of the company

Words like Sri Lanka, State, and President should not be used in the company’s name

02. Articles of Association

The statement which includes information relating to the general administration of a limited company. According to the Companies Act of No. 07 of 2007. Following information are included in the Articles of Association.

For free distribution.77

The objectives of the company The rights and obligations of shareholders of the company The information relating to management and administration of the company

03. The statement specifying the consent of each of the initial director to act as directors of the company

04. The statement specifying the consent of the initial secretary to act as the secretary of the company

If the Registrar of the Companies is satisfied with the documents submitted, the company will be registered under the Companies Act of No 07 of 2007. After the registration, the Registrar will issue the Certificate of Incorporation.

Characteristics of a private limited company

Some of the main characteristics of private limited companies are given below.

Cannot invite the general public to purchase the shares of the company

Buying the shares of a private limited company could be done only by the members of the family, friends and relatives. Shares of these companies cannot be offered to the public.

Minimum number of shareholders is one and maximum is 50

Since, based on the companies Act, even a single person can start a private limited company, the minimum number of shareholders of a private limited company will be one. Similarly, the maximum number of shareholders of such companies has been limited to 50 by the Companies Act.

Managed by a board of directors

Management of limited companies is done by a board of directors. According to Companies Act, there should be at least one director in a limited company to manage the company affairs. Yet the Companies Act does not specify the maximum number of directors.

Has a legal personality

Has a continued existence

For free distribution.78

Accounting and auditing is mandatory

Liability is limited

Advantages of private limited companies

Even a single person can commence

Can commence by getting the involvement of the family members, friends and relatives.

Being formal and having a high recognition

Limited liability

Having a separate legal identity

Having a continued existence

Limitations of private limited companies

Inability to raise more capital since the shares are issued to the members of the family, friends and relatives

Having mandatory rules, regulations and procedures

Opportunity to get the involvement of many people is limited since the maximum number of shareholders is limited to 50

Franchises

Franchises can be identified as a business concept which has emerged to face the rapidly changing business environment. This gives the opportunity to an entrepreneur to join the large scale businesses and carry on the business activities. These businesses are operated as sole proprietorships, partnerships or incorporated companies.

For free distribution.79

A form of business organization to which the power is granted by an existing business which sells a product or service, to sell the said product or service in a specific market area under its trade name are known as franchises.

Starting a franchise

At present, franchises are operating under different forms. However, the basic structure of any franchise is given below.

Figure 6.7: Starting a franchise

Franchisor

Franchisee

Franchise agreement

Franchise

There are two main parties who are involved in a franchise.

Franchisor The party that allows to sell its products in a specific market area under his/ her name. The objective of this party is to expand the market without investing capital and to earn profits.

Franchisee The party that gets the permission to sell goods or services in a specific market area using the brand name of the franchisor.

In order to enter in to this type of a business relationship, the franchisor and the franchisee should enter in to a stipulated (agreed) relationship. This is known as franchise agreement. Common agreements regarding the commencement and the conduct of the franchise are given in the franchise agreement.

For free distribution.80

Examples for some such common agreements are given below.

Examples :- Services provided by the franchisor to franchisee Products that are being allowed to sell The value of the payment made by the franchisee to franchisor

As the result of the franchise agreement entered in to by the franchisor and the franchisee, franchises are formed. Depending on the permission granted by the franchisor to sell the products and services in his/her name to the franchisee, charges have to be made. This charge is known as royalty.

Basic characteristics of a franchise

Following basic characteristics can be seen in franchises.

Involvement of two parties as franchisor and franchisee

Franchisor grants the permission to sell the goods and services in a specific market area in its trade name. Based on the permission granted, franchisee sells the goods and the services in a specific market areas under the relevant trade name. Accordingly, two parties as franchisor and franchisee are involved in a franchise.

There is a stipulated agreement between the franchisor and the franchisee.

Franchises are formed depending on the agreement entered in to by the franchisor and franchisee. This written agreement is known as the franchise agreement.

Franchisee makes a payment to the franchisor.

Franchisor allows the franchisee to sell the goods and services in the name of franchisor for a payment. Details regarding this should be included in the franchise agreement.

Advantages of franchises

There are few benefits that both the franchisor and the franchisee can obtain in common due to franchises.

For free distribution.81

Benefits to the franchisor

Opportunity to expand the business activities to other markets

Ability to enjoy large scale benefits by minimizing the pressure of maintaining a huge staff

Franchisor receives an income

Benefits to the franchisee

Franchisee gets an opportunity to earn profits using the goodwill of the franchisor

Franchisee can easily enter to a popular market using the goodwill of the franchisor

Franchisor provides management training to franchisee

Limitations of franchises

To the franchisor

Due to the unsuccessful business dealings of the franchisee, the goodwill of the franchisor can be damaged

Franchisor has to obey the legal bonds and the limitations that arise when conducting the business activities of a franchise

To the franchisee

Franchisee has to incur the legal charges, bank charges, establishment cost etc. to get the franchise

Franchisee cannot work independently due to the control of franchisor

Franchisee may have to pay a high royalty and other charges to franchisor

For free distribution.82

Activity 07

Few statements specifying the characteristics of different business organizations are given below.

01. Businesses having a continued existence and a separate legal identity that are owned by a single person

02. Businesses with an unlimited liability that are conducted by a combination of few people. 03. Businesses having an unlimited liability and no separate legal identity that are conducted by a single person

Read the above statements carefully and answer the following questions.

01. State the type of business organization that is explained by each of the statements. 02. Suggest business names to each of the business organizations. 03. Name laws, ordinances, acts etc. that are applicable to each business organization.

Activity 08

Name few franchises that are operating in Sri Lanka.

Let’s Answer

01. What are the common characteristics that can be seen in business organizations?

02. What are the basic characteristics of a sole proprietorship?

03. State the facts that can be included in a partnership agreement.

04. Classify business organizations according to the ownership.

05. Name the parties that are involved in a franchise agreement.

For free distribution.83

Chapter 07

Entrepreneurial Culture

This chapter discusses the followings.

7.1 Introduction to culture

7.2 Introduction to entrepreneurial culture

7.3 The need for the creation of an entrepreneurial culture

7.4 Social and economic factors conducive for the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture

7.5 Social factors against entrepreneurship

7.6 Role of women in entrepreneurship

7.7 Business ethics and social responsibility

7.8 Incentives available for entrepreneurs

For free distribution.84

7.1 Introduction to culture

At the beginning of human civilization it can be seen that man has been working with different parties of the society as well as with the various cultures in satisfying their needs and wants. The values of a culture shape the people. Culture can be explained as beliefs, values, attitudes, behavior patterns, different ideas, customs and norms that exist among people of a society which are unique to them. Depending on the characteristics of these cultural elements, the behavior of the people will be decided.

Example :- In Sri Lankan society, people from different races like Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims and Burgers are living together and these ethnic groups possess values, beliefs, attitudes and different behaviors which are unique to them.

7.2 Introduction to entrepreneurial culture

Entrepreneurial culture is a collection of elements like special behaviors, attitudes, beliefs, ideas, behavior patterns, rites, rituals, and customs which are unique to entrepreneurs.

A person living in the entrepreneurial society inherits entrepreneurial traits. That is the person who thinks positively, accepts risks creatively and does innovations. Moreover, such people are dissatisfied with the status quo and try to change the prevailing condition. Further those people are very sensitive to the environment and owing to that sensitivity they have the capability of identifying the opportunities and chasing them. As soon as the opportunities are identified, they exploit them.

Figure 7.1

For free distribution.85

7.3 Need for the creation of an entrepreneurial culture

Most of the countries in the world have developed due to the influence of cultural and social forces. Since efforts are being taken to develop Sri Lanka, the need for an entrepreneurial culture is highlighted. Solutions to most of the economic and social problems of Sri Lanka can be found through this.

A Solution to unemployment

The unemployment rate of Sri Lanka is considerable. The nature of this unemployment is very complex.

Example :- Unemployment is high among educated people than the uneducated people.

Unemployment is at a high percentage among the youth aged below 30 years.

A considerable percentage of the workforce of Sri Lanka migrates for jobs.

Unemployment is high among educated women.

Hence the creation of jobs for the workforce of Sri Lanka can be done very easily within an entrepreneurial culture.

Achievement of economic growth

If an economy is to grow, production of goods and services within that economy should increase. Any country can achieve high economic growth through an entrepreneurial culture.

Availability of unused resources

Sri Lanka is a land full of resources. Those resources are not properly utilized at present. There is a possibility of generating products by using those unused resources.

For free distribution.86

Need for new job creators

It has become difficult to provide jobs for the people compared to the population growth of Sri Lanka. In order to provide jobs, new businesses should be created. As a result, direct and indirect jobs will be created when conducting and developing those businesses.

Need to minimize the inconsistencies in income distribution

Inconsistency in income distribution occurs when a large part of the population of the country receives a small portion of the national income and small part of the population receives a large portion of the national income.

Through popularization of the entrepreneurial culture, entrepreneurial ability of many people will be improved. Through that ability, they can earn profits. Further through the increase in employment, income will flow to the low income earning segment. This will minimize the inconsistencies in income distribution.

7.4 Social and economic factors conducive for the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture

There are many social and economic factors favourable for the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture. Some of them are given below.

Existence of a favorable economic environment

To start and run new businesses, there should be a favourable economic environment for entrepreneurs. Economic factors should be in favour of business activities. This include factors such as low interest rates, increase in income level and favourable foreign exchange rates.

Stable political condition

Having a political authority which makes favourable rules and regulations and policies for the identification of solutions to economic and social problems giving prominence to entrepreneurship while securing it will be very helpful for the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture. Further the political authority should have understood the rewards of entrepreneurship.

For free distribution.87

Incentives given by government and other organizations

Government and public sector organizations can immensely support the upliftment of entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurial culture can be developed by giving financial and non-financial aids.

Examples :- Giving tax relief Giving loans under concessionary conditions Giving training and advice Giving aids Facilitating the meetings of local and foreign buyers Organizing workshops and exhibitions

Having a family background which encourages entrepreneurship

A family background which encourages entrepreneurship will positively affect the creation of an entrepreneurial culture. Creation of an environment within the family which encourages the development of entrepreneurial capabilities will help the generation of successful entrepreneurs in the future. There is a greater tendency for new generations to choose entrepreneurial activities when their families have family businesses which have existed continuously. This too is a favorable factor which help the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture.

Encouragement given by large businesses

Large businesses often get the help of small and medium scale businesses when conducting their businesses. Hence large businesses always provide different aids to small and medium scale businesses.

Examples :- Obtaining raw materials and parts required by large companies from small businesses. Transferring some production activities to small businesses (sub contracting)

Ability of obtaining resources

Availability of ample resources and ability to use them for production are factors which encourage entrepreneurship.

For free distribution.88

Role models

Ability to witness role models of successful entrepreneurs in the society is a major factor which influences the creation of an entrepreneurial culture. Such a guidance will help the entrepreneurs to understand the way they should proceed.

'Think differently'

Steve Jobs- founder of Apple Company

Encouragement given by different parties

Encouragement given by the members of the family, school, different societies and friends, makes a favourable impact for the creation of an entrepreneurial culture. At present, newspapers and electronic media can play a big role in this regard.

Activity 01

Identify two successful entrepreneurs in Sri Lanka.

Search their path of becoming a successful entrepreneur from their life stories.

List few lessons that can be learnt from their life stories for a new entrepreneur.

Figure 7.2

For free distribution.89

7.5 Social factors which obstruct entrepreneurship

There are many personal rewards of being an entrepreneur. Further, entrepreneurs generate higher rewards for the economy as well. One of the mechanisms of the development of a country is entrepreneurship. Yet many are reluctant to be entrepreneurs.

Let’s discuss some social factors that go against entrepreneurship.

High recognition given to salaried jobs

The dream of most of Sri Lankans is to do a highly paid job. The reason for this is the tendency of the society to judge the success and the recognition of a person from his or her job. Owing to this attitude, many are used to wait expecting a job by suppressing their entrepreneurial skills.

Reluctance to accept risks and challenges

A main characteristic of an entrepreneur is the readiness to accept manageable risks. They should accept the challenge of making their innovations successful. Therefore, the unwillingness of people to accept risk and challenges is another barrier to the entrepreneurship.

Lack of encouragement from education

The present traditional education system does not support the generation of people who can see the world with a creative mind, change the status quo and accept risks and challenges. This acts as a barrier for entrepreneurship.

Insufficient government support

Weaknesses of policies which are for the development of entrepreneurship in Sri Lanka and insufficiency of incentives given to promote entrepreneurs are barriers for entrepreneurship.

For free distribution.90

Dependent mentality

Most of the Sri Lankans today have high expectations towards what they inherit from their parents and try to live by spending what they have inherited thereafter. Further, they expect subsidies given by the government. People are reluctant to earn what they need through their own effort. Such mentality acts as a negative factor which demotivates people from being entrepreneurs.

7.6 Role of women in entrepreneurship

‘The hand that rocks the cradle, rules the world’

The above saying depicts the unique capability within a woman. They can lead anything towards success due to their creativity, dedication, risk taking ability, intelligence, gumption and flexibility. Owing to above qualities, women today choose to be successful entrepreneurs individually or as groups by identifying new opportunities and converting them to their own business. Further they provide job opportunities to others through their businesses.

Need of women choosing to do businesses

It has become necessary for women to enter into the entrepreneurship field today. There are many reasons for this.

To achieve a satisfactory income level

Since cost of living has increased at present, it has become difficult to run the affairs of a home only with the income of one individual. In order to avoid this, it is necessary for women to earn an income through a business.

Figure 7.3

For free distribution.91

Majority of the population being women

When analyzing the composition of population of Sri Lanka, it is evident that women represents the majority. Hence, we can come to the conclusion that there is a considerable women representation within the workforce of Sri Lanka. Hence, women should venture in to business and should give their contribution to uplift the economy of the country.

High unemployment among women

Unemployment rate is high among women. It is a waste of resources of a country. When women enter in to business, their contribution can be used to increase the national production. It will be a solution to unemployment since they create employment for themselves and for the others.

Existence of businesses which need contribution of women

Women’s contribution is needed for the businesses which require unique skills of women and qualities like softness and kindness.

Examples :- Pre-schools, Nursing, Beauty culture, Day care centers, Fashion designing

Trend of women getting higher education

There is an increasing trend among women to get school education as well as higher education. They can contribute for the economic development of the country by starting businesses independently by making use of the higher education they acquired.

Opportunities for women to do business

It is important to have opportunities within the business environment for women to enter into business. Following are some such opportunities which can be seen in the economy of Sri Lanka.

For free distribution.92

High demand created for services

A high demand for different services has been created in order to fulfill human needs and wants owing to the facts like busy schedules of people, and increase in income levels. Opportunities are open for women to provide those services.

Examples :- Selling processed foods Laundry service Day care service

Existence of business opportunities which can be started with a low investment and low risk

Examples :- Event management – organizing different functions Organizing local and overseas tours

Unique financial and non -financial incentives being introduced to women

Examples :- Giving loans at lower interest or interest free Conducting entrepreneurial training programmers for women

Changing social attitudes regarding women

Examples :- Recognition given to women in the society has been increased

Acknowledging the economic contribution made by women

Women engaging in activities which were under male dominance

Figure 7.4

Figure 7.5

For free distribution.93

Some strengths of women to be an entrepreneur are given below.

Ability to use the inherent skills Having self-discipline

Ability of balancing the private life and the business activities

Ability of using time effectively

Having a high level of creativity

Ability of building close relationships with different parties and developing trust through that

The attitude in the society that women are reasonable and trustworthy

Being frugal

Barriers for women entrepreneurship

Women encounter different barriers when they run businesses. Sometimes women refrain from being an entrepreneur due to those barriers. Some such barriers are given below.

Challenge of balancing the roles of the personal life and the role as an entrepreneur

Women have to give prominence to household activities and as a result attention given to the business can go down.

Independence of women has not yet been established in the society.

Dislike to do businesses is going beyond the tradition.

Programs which promote women entrepreneurship are not enough.

Difficulties of obtaining capital.

Figure 7.6

For free distribution.94

Activity 02

Naveesha was a student in grade 08 and is the eldest daughter of a family which had economic difficulties. Her brother is studying in grade 04. Her father is a labourer and mother is a house wife. The salary of Naveesha’s father is not enough for all the household activities. Yet her mother was frugal and responsible enough to spend a greater portion of the income on the education of children and the rest for other needs of the home. Though income difficulties were there, they lived a happy life.

One day Naveesha’s father met with an accident and became bed-ridden. As a result, he lost his job. Naveesha regretted a lot seeing the helplessness of her mother who didn’t receive any income for the medical treatments of her father and for the household affairs. Naveesha’s mother was a very courageous woman and she determined to stand on her own. Naveesha’s mother started a small institution which makes handbags utilizing the resources available in her area with the small amount of money she has saved. Naveesha was amazed when she saw the dedication of her mother who worked hard for her business day and night while doing all the work of her father without any negligence.

Her creations were different when compared to the other handbags available in the market. As a result she was able to increase the sales of her products. She was able to give jobs in her business for four women of her area within a short period of time and became a famous and a successful individual of the area. Further, she was selected as a member of the executive committee of the women’s society of the area. The fact that she was able to continue the education of her children and earn a satisfactory income to nurture them witnessed that she had successfully faced the challenge of balancing the roles of her personal life and the role as an entrepreneur.

After recovering fully, Naveesha’s father was satisfied with the achievements her mother had gained when he was disabled and decided not to seek other jobs and to join and develop the business of Naveesha’s mother. Naveesha too determined to be a successful woman entrepreneur like her mother after studying well.

Read the above case carefully and answer the following questions.

01. Identify the entrepreneurial characteristics of Naveesha’s mother.

02. Explain how she had overcome the barriers of women entrepreneurship.

For free distribution.95

Activity 03

Collect the reports/ records published in newspapers and magazines that describe the contribution of women to the economic development of the country.

Discuss them in the classroom and identify the facts which have motivated them and the challenges they have faced.

Activity 04

Identify the natural resources available in your area which are not utilized.

List business opportunities that can be exploited by women using those resources.

7.7 Business ethics and social responsibility

Business Ethics

A business should earn profits without harming the environment and any other party. For that it is necessary to follow a code of ethics when running businesses. Those business ethics depend upon the values of the people who are involved in the business.

Common agreements arrived at in writing, verbally or symbolically, by a person or a group of people regarding what is right and what is wrong or what is good and what is bad are called business ethics.

Examples :- Giving priority to the consumer in every business affair Doing business without harming the natural environment

For free distribution.96

Three main parties influence the determination of business ethics.

1. Proprietors 2. Members of the organization 3. External society

Activity 05

Suggest few business ethics that should be followed by a business.

Activity 06

List ten activities that can happen in a business which violate business ethics.

Social Responsibility of a Business

The traditional view regarding the social responsibility of a business is that a business should provide maximum returns for the capital invested by the owners. But at present, the social responsibility of a business has become a broader concept.

Social responsibility of a business indicates that a business has a responsibility towards the owners of the business as well as the whole external society within which the business is operated and nurtured.

Hence businesses should pay attention to the prevailing issues of the society including protecting the environment, economic development, social and cultural development and establishment of a peaceful society.

Levels of Social Responsibility of a Business

Social responsibility of a business can be fulfilled according to the following ways.

01. Economic responsibility 02. Legal responsibility 03. Ethical responsibility 04. Philanthropic responsibility

For free distribution.97

01. Economic responsibility

The responsibility to contribute to increase the rewards of the owners of the business. Fulfillment of this is essential for the survival of the business.

Examples :- Securing the financial stability of the business, profitability, using limited resources efficiently.

02. Legal responsibility

This is to conducting the business according to the rules and regulations imposed by the government and other institutions.

Examples :- Paying Employees Provident Fund properly Refraining from environmental pollution Refraining from using prohibited raw materials

03. Ethical responsibility

This is to comply with the written or symbolic rules which are believed to be right by the society in which the business operates. Even though these responsibilities are not compulsory in order to conduct the business, they are fulfilled by businesses as they represent the expectations of different social parties.

Examples :- Giving equal job opportunities to women and to the minority Training and development of employees

Improving the quality of the product/service

04. Philanthropic responsibility

These are the responsibilities which are not essential for the survival of the business and not directly expected by different parties of the society from the business. These are the high level responsibilities which are fulfilled voluntarily by a business without expecting anything in return.

For free distribution.98

Examples :- Sponsoring community events including sports, educational and health events

Stakeholders of a Business

Stakeholders are the parties who are influenced directly or indirectly due to the conduct of a business.

These parties have different expectations. Some examples for such expectations are given below.

Party Expectation

Owners Satisfactory return to the capital invested

Employees Earning a reasonable salary and the job security.

Creditors Recovering the loans provided within the due period

Government Complying with the rules and regulations and charging taxes properly

Consumers Obtaining quality products at a reasonable price.

As given in the above illustration different parties believe that their expectations will be met and when they are not being met they tend to act against the business. Hence, a business should decide their policies and ethics, in a way that the expectations of the above groups are met.

Rewards of Complying with Social Responsibility

Improve the goodwill of the business Ensure the long term survival of the business Possibility of legal issues to emerge will be low High profitability is ensured as the demand for the products and services of the business increases Satisfaction and loyalty of employees will increase

For free distribution.99

Activity 07

Mark () if the following statements are correct or (

) if they are wrong in the box given in front of each statement.

No.Cost $

01Though a high cost has to be born for waste disposal by a business, complying with that will help create a good image for the business.

02Businesses that are established in an economy also have the responsibility of increasing the welfare of that economy.

03Stakeholders are satisfied when a business complies with the equitable ethics which are acknowledged by a society.

04Responsibilities with which a business should comply affect the survival of the business.

05Responsibilities that the whole society believes a business will essentially fulfill are called philanthropic responsibilities.

7.8 Incentives available for entrepreneurs

By promoting entrepreneurship of a country, the country can gain many benefits. Due to its importance most of the government as well as the private institutions try to promote entrepreneurship. As a result of that different incentives are given to entrepreneurs in order to start and run the businesses.

For free distribution.100

Reasons as to why the business starters require government incentives are given below.

To encourage entrepreneurs to start new businesses

To give the opportunity for entrepreneurs to convert their business ideas in to real businesses

To induce self-confidence and positive attitudes of starters of business

To provide a successful entry to the entrepreneurs

To carry on the social welfare activities expected by a government

Types of Incentives

Different incentives given by the government can mainly be categorized as follows.

Figure 7.7

Types of incentives

Non-financial incentives

Financial incentives

Loan facilities of commercial bank

Other loan facilities

Gift and financialaids

Consultancy services

Technical services

Market facilities

Financial Incentives

Aids given to a business which are of monetary nature are called financial incentives.

Examples :- Giving loan facilities under concessionary interest rates Giving loans without securities Extending the repayment period of loans Financial gifts

For free distribution.101

Non -Financial Incentives

Incentives given to a business which are of non- monetary nature are called non-financial incentives. That is to provide infrastructure facilities including technical and marketing facilities.

Examples :- Training entrepreneurs Training employees Training on marketing Consultation on business plan development Giving technical training Giving knowledge regarding packaging Help finding the market

Activity 08

Identify whether the following are financial incentives or non-financial incentives.

No.IncentiveAnswer

01Obtaining a bank loan of Rs. 100 000 from a State bank

02Getting an aid of Rs. 500 000 under non-repaying basis

03Receiving a machine worth Rs. 10 000 as a donation from a government institution04Giving technical instructions regarding the production process of a business

05Giving the opportunity to participate in a workshop in order to get the instructions regarding packaging under a special promotional program06Getting an opportunity to link with the foreign buyers after participating for a Exhibition organized by the Export Development Board07Giving a stall of an exhibition which is worth Rs. 10,000 to an entrepreneur free of charge

For free distribution.102

Institutions that provide incentives

Different government as well as private institutions are engaged in providing incentives to entrepreneurs.

Some examples for the institutions which provide financial incentives are given below.

All domestic commercial banks Other financial institutions

Some institutions which provide non-financial benefits along with the services they provide are given below.

Industrial Development Board

-Giving advice regarding investment opportunities

Providing industrial information

Giving technical supportProviding engineering servicesGiving vocational services and basic facilities for industriesProviding marketing services

Industrial Technology InstituteGiving technical consultation for industries

Calibration of laboratory and technical equipments

Development of products and production process

Industry and laboratory measures

Repairing electronic equipments

Inspection of finished products and raw materials and quality control

Technical training

-Ascertaining the technical errors of industries

For free distribution.103

Sri Lanka Export Development Board

Creating an environment conducive for exports in Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Standard Institution-Preparing national standards

Issuing quality certificates of products -

Certifying quality systems

Inspecting the quality of export goods

Import inspection

Instructions to improve quality

Activity 9

Imagine that you are going to start a business. Name institutions from which non-financial facilities can be obtained for that business and identify those non-financial incentives.

Let’s Answer

01. Briefly explain the term “entrepreneurial culture”.

02. Describe briefly why an entrepreneurial culture should be created in Sri Lanka.

03. List social factors which are required for the emergence of an entrepreneurial culture.

04. Name four stakeholders of a business.

05. Explain the social responsibility of a business briefly and indicate the need of complying with those responsibilities.

06. Give two examples each for financial and non-financial incentives.

(All the pictures appeared in this book have been downloaded from the Internet)