==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution

1

01

Law and Justice

Defining law

Law can be defined as a system of rules used for controlling formal human behaviour and human activities in a community or in a country. Different thinkers have defined law in different ways.

Definitions given by T. H. Green and John Austin are given below.

'Law is a system of rights and obligations enforced by the state' . T.H. Green

'The law is the command of the sovereign and violating it is a punishable offence'. John Austin

Every society should be ruled according to a specific law. It is the responsibility of the citizens of a country to respect and obey the law. Justice, peace and social security are secured in a society where the rule of law exists. The prime aim of the law is to control human behaviour by which justice is ensured so that life, rights and property of the people are safeguarded.

Justice is another concept related to law. Justice can be defined as a fair behaviour or fair treatment. Justice is meted out through impartial enforcement of law after listening to all the parties well.

For free distribution

2

Dispensing the law should be done in fairness and equality to all. If the law is properly exercised in a country the society becomes law abiding. People develop a positive attitude towards the law and trust it. It contributes to create a just and fair society.

Following factors are very important to create justice.

²²Right of an individual to know about allegations made against him

²²Right of an individual to be heard, in person or by an Attorney-at-Law, at a fair trial by a competent court.

²²The right to get a fair and an impartial trial

Characteristics of law

All are equal before law and all have the right to get the protection of law. Some of the highly civilized societies, where advanced legal systems prevail, have the following characteristics.

²²Laws are made only by the state based on its authoritative power

²²They are made with the intention of controlling human behaviour and actions

²²Laws should be fair and just

²²Laws should be enacted aiming at achieving the wellbeing of the common society

²²Laws should adjust in conformity with the changing needs of the society

²²Laws should be clear and definite

²²Contravention of law is a punishable offence

For free distribution

3

Sources of law

Factors that contribute to the derivation of law or the means of getting information about law can be defined as sources of law. Some of these sources are as follows:

1. Constitution - It is the supreme law of a country

2. Different statutes - They are enactments passed by the parliament and they can also be taken as the sources of law

3. Judgements - Decrees, orders, pronouncements or judgements delivered by competent Courts of Law which are followed by the other courts of law subsequently. This is known as Case law.

4. Views and principles expressed by legal authorities or eminent scholars of law are recognized as scientific principles of law.

5. Customs - Well established customs accepted by the society are known as Customary laws

6. Religion - Laws have been made on the basis of different religions. E.g. Muslim law and Vehera and Devalagam law.

Types of laws

According to the way that laws are exercised, they are classified as domestic and international law.

Domestic laws

Domestic laws are operative and effective within the territory of a country. They can differ from country to country. They are enacted in order to meet the needs of the country. Domestic laws can be classified into two types as Civil law and Criminal law. They are described in the diagram given below.

For free distribution

4

Differences between criminal law and civil law are as follows:

Criminal LawCivil Law

²² When a person damages the life or the property of another person, criminal law is applied to determine the case.

²² Criminal law does not have different branches but it is classified as crimes of severe nature and minor offences.

²² Special punishments are imposed or inflicted by the Courts on persons convicted of such crimes and offences.

²² Criminal Procedure of 1979 and the Penal Code of 1833 are important statutes that deal with crimes.

²² In criminal law, the priority is given to punishments and rehabilitation.

²² In criminal law the complaint or indictment is prepared by the police or Department of Attorney General.

²² Civil law resolves or deals with disputes among individuals.

²² Civil law has different branches.

²² Paying compensation to the affected parties on civil offences committed on them.

²² Civil procedure code is important with regard to civil law.

²² Civil law gives priority to recover damage or restoration of damage from the parties at fault.

²² In a civil case application for relief from court is sought by individual parties concerned.

E.g.- confiscation of property by the state, capital punishment, imprisonment.

E.g. - Law of contract business law, family law

For free distribution

5

Criminal law covers and includes prevention of crimes, taking action against offences concerning anti social activities, activities that affect or threaten peace in the public such as murder, torture, injuring, sexual harassments and crimes, rape, damaging common property, stealing property, looting, keeping stolen items and keeping drugs and more over selling them.

Diagram 1.1 Classification of Domestic Law

Civil lawCriminal law

The law preventing anti-social activities done by an individual or a group of individuals.

Eg - Murder, Plunders, rape, thefts, drug trafficking and child abuse.

Domestic Law

Constitutional Law

The supreme law of exercising the powers of the state.

Eg - Constitution.

The law dealing with personal relations of the people.

Eg - Contracts, marital affairs, interstate property transmission, rights, banking and business, as well as the problems related to commercial affairs and lands.

International Law

'Starke' defines international law as the law that controls inter-state relationships, relationship between states and international organizations and the individuals. Currently there are many branches of law that have emerged from international law.

Eg - International human rights law, environmental law, law of entrepreneurship, oceanic law. International Court of Justice and International Criminal Court to dispense with international law.

The Legal systems of Sri Lanka

Roman-Dutch law is the Common law of Sri Lanka. In addition to that there are a few other special laws in Sri Lanka.

For free distribution

6

(01). Kandyan law

Kandyan law was in operation during the time of ancient Kandyan Kingdom. During the period of British rule, this law was restricted only to the Sinhalese living in Kandyan territories. Today, this law controls marriage, divorce, heirship etc. Kandyan Sinhalese are free to contract marriages under the General Law of the country.

(02). Thesawalamai law

The term Thesawalamai means the custom of the land. This law had its origin in the customs of the Tamils resided in Northern province. All those customs were codified into a law in 1706.

(03) Muslim law

Muslim law is applicable to anyone who follows Islam. Al-Quran, Al-Hadees, Sunnahs, Ijma and Kiyas are the documents that are considered as sources of Islamic law. Mohamadan Code made in 1806 is currently operative in Sri Lanka.

Eg- Muslim marriages and divorce, estate rights, adoptation, maintenance etc are governed by this law. Quazi courts were set up in 1929 for the first time to close cases according to Muslim law.

The responsibility of a state is to establish a good society in the country while preserving and maintaining law and order. It is essential to work according to indigenous laws when the law is in conflict with the other laws of the country. It is also important to bring dignity to the country when dealing with other countries under the international law.

Activity 1.1

²² What do you mean by the term “law”?

²² Explain as to why a country needs law.

²² Describe the special laws in Sri Lanka briefly.

For free distribution

7

Judicial system in Sri Lanka

Evolution of judicial system in Sri Lanka

The judicial system in Sri Lanka has had its origin in the monarchical era. The king was the highest and the supreme judicial officer while judiciary was functioning under an unwritten system of law. The final appeal on any judgement was also made to him.

Fig. 1.1 Kandy Magul Maduwa the royal court

Portuguese continued to apply the ancient Sinhala judicial system in Sri Lanka during their rule. Judicial powers were exercised by Korale, Disave and Vidane while village council system or gam sabha was also continued. During the period of the Dutch there were three judicial districts namely Colombo, Jaffna and Galle. They employed a systematic judicial system.

The judicial system was made much more systematic during the period of British colonial rule. Accordingly, the Roman –Dutch law introduced by the Dutch was also applied further by the British judicial system. During that period, one could appeal to the privy council of England against a decision given by an apex court in Sri Lanka. Constitutional reforms in 1972 abolished that power. According

For free distribution

8

to the Law of Dispensing Justice introduced in 1973, the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka was made as the apex court while the Court Of Appeal, High Court, District Court, Magistrate Court and the Primary Courts remained as other courts of the judicial system of Sri Lanka.

Activity 1.2

²²Study the special changes brought about to the judicial system in post-independence period of Sri Lanka.

Present judicial system of Sri Lanka

Judicial system established under Judicature Act and by the Constitution of 1978 is illustrated in the diagram given below:

Supreme court

Court of appeal

Provincial high court

High court

District court

Magistrate court

Diagram 1.2 - Present judicial system of Sri Lanka

In addition to the judicial system mentioned above, some other institutions and tribunals administering judicial functions have been set up through special Acts of Parliament. Accordingly, labour tribunals have been established to settle labour disputes, while Quazi courts have been set up for resolving marriage and divorce

For free distribution

9

issues of Muslims. More over Rent Control Board has been established to resolve problems related to house rentals. In addition to this, Conciliation Board has been established to resolve the disputes without going to court.

Now, let us study the main judicial institutions briefly.

Supreme Court

Supreme Court is the highest and final superior court of record and is empowered to exercise its powers, subject to the provisions of the Constitution. The Court has final and conclusive civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction on appeals from the Court of Appeal or any Court of first Instance. It is headed by the Chief Justice. Powers of the Supreme Court which comprises of the Chief Justice and other Judges are shown in the diagram 1.3.

Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

Jurisdiction in respect of powers to hear petitions on fundamental rights

Consultative jurisdiction

Jurisdiction in respect of petitions on referendums

Jurisdiction in election petitions

(presidential election)

Final appellate Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction on making Supreme Court rules

Jurisdiction in respect of privileges of the parliament

Diagram 1.3 - Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court

Jurisdiction in respect of constitutional matters

For free distribution

10

Fig. 1.2 - Supreme court

Court of Appeal

Next to the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal is the highest and final superior court of record. It is headed by the president of the Court of Appeal. Judges are appointed to the Court of Appeal by the president under the recommendation of the Constitutional Council. Jurisdication of the Court of appeal are as follows:

Jurisdictionof Court of appeal

Appeals from the high court in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction

Jurisdiction to try election petitions in respect of the election of the members of parliament

Power of Investigating and inspecting the records of the courts of first instance

Jurisdiction to grant and issue writs of certiorori prohibition, procedendo, mandamus, Quo warranto and habeas corpus and to grant injunctions

Diagram 1.4 Jurisdiction of Court of Appeal

For free distribution

11

Provincial High Court

The provincial high courts were established under 13th Amendment of 1978 constitution. Judges are appointed to this court by the chief justice. The purpose of establishing this court is to decentralize the powers of court of appeal to provincial level. It provides an opportunity for the public to present their appeals at provincial level. The powers of this court are as follows:

Diagram 1.5 Jurisdiction of Provincial High Courts

Jurisdiction

of Provincial

High Court

Commercial jurisdiction

Appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions, Sentences, orders entered or imposed by District Courts, Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within the province.

Writ jurisdiction in respect of powers exercised under any law or under any statutes made by the provincial council.

Appeals from Labour Tribunals, Agrarian Tribunals and Small Claims courts.

Issuing writs of Habeas corpus in provincial councils.

High court

The High Court of Sri Lanka established under the Constitution, has power and the authority to hear, try and determine all prosecutions on indictment. It has criminal and admiralty jurisdiction and also jurisdiction with regard to offences committed aboard aircraft and within the territorial air space. The High Court is the only Court which exercises the jurisdiction of the Court of First Instance and the appellate jurisdiction. It exercises the civil jurisdiction as well as the criminal jurisdiction.

Commercial High Court is empowered to hear cases involving commercial transactions worth of which exceeds three million rupees and jurisdiction over the cases falling under the Intellectual Property Act. Those powers are as follows:

For free distribution

12

Original Criminal Jurisdiction

Applications for the return of or access to an abducted child (exercised by the High Court of the Western Province)

Offences committed aboard aircraft and within the territorial air space

Jurisdiction to hear and determine an offence i.e. influencing or attempting to influence any decision or order made by the Judicial Service Commission or influencing any member thereof

²² Murder cases

²² Attempt to murder

²² Rapes

²² Treasons

²² Large scale plunders

Admiralty Jurisdiction

An offence committed by a Sri Lankan abroad

Diagram 1.6 Jurisdiction of High Court

Jurisdiction of High Court

District Courts

District Courts have been established in 54 judicial districts in Sri Lanka. These courts have all civil jurisdictions relevant to each district. The appointment and removal of district court judges are carried out by the Judicial Service Commission. Cases heard by District Courts are as follows;

1. Cases related to marriages. (divorce, marriage, asking compensations for sexual misconduct and divorce allowances etc)

2. Testamentary Cases - (cases related to the property of people, died without leaving a last will i.e. intestate estate of deceased persons)

3. Guardianship of idiots and persons of unsound mind and guardianship of their property.

4. Cases related to guardianship and legality of the under aged children.

5. Demands for adoption of children.

6. Requests for changing the names in birth certificate.

7. Cases related to incomes.

8. Cases on trusts and bankruptcy.

For free distribution

13

9. Cases on payments, debts, damages demands for and financial cases.

10. Partition cases.

11. Cases on lands.

12. Cases on house rents.

13. Cases on compensation for accidents and insurance.

14. Cases filed under company act.

Magistrate's Court

Magistrate's Courts are established for 74 judicial divisions in Sri Lanka. Every Magistrate's Court is vested with original criminal jurisdiction, and is ordinarily empowered to impose sentences up to a fine of Rs. 1,500 and/or 2 years rigorous or simple imprisonment.

All Magistrates are appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.

Appeals from convictions, sentences or orders of Magistrate's Courts within a Province lie to the High Court of the Province.

²²Offences on public security.

²²Offences related to army, air force and navy.

²²Offences related to government servants.

²²Offences related to elections.

²²Request for orders concerning protection from domestic violence.

²²Providing false evidence and offences against public justice.

In addition to that this court can also work on offences mentioned in parliamentary Acts.

Eg.- Forest Ordinance, Excise Ordinance, Cosmetics, Devices and Drugs Act, Food Act, Road Development Authority Act, as well as Motor Traffic Act.

The cases heard by magistrate's courts are as follows:

For free distribution

14

Activity 1.3

²²Observe a judicial institute in your area and prepare a report about its functions.

Duty of the chiefs who exercise the law

Three main offices or roles that occupy the top most place on judicial affairs and law of Sri Lanka can be identified. They are, the Minister of Justice, Chief Justice, and Attorney General. Now let us study their duties.

Minister of Justice

Minister of Justice is entitled to get the bills related to the field of judiciary from the parliament as well as to answer the questions of the parliament on judicial affairs. He can also discharge the functions assigned by the constitution and by the other acts, as well as to appoint Justice of Peace.

Chief Justice

He is the chief of the Supreme Court which is the apex court of Sri Lanka. He is incharge of inspecting registrar of Supreme Court giving commands and control. He is also the chairman of Judicial Service Commission. He makes rules related to judiciary and three more judges assist this course. Few areas on which rules are made are as follows:

²²Rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals, appeals, to be entertained or dismissed.

²²Rules as to the granting of bail.

²²Affairs related to the profession of lawyers (Admission, Enrolment, suspension and Removal of Attorneys - at - Law)

²²Affairs related to jury.

²²Amending, changing rules and introducing new rules related to judiciary.

²²Proceedings of Fiscals and the process of such courts.

For free distribution

15

Attorney General

Present post of Attorney General has been established according to the ordinance no 01 of 1883. Attorney General who is the chief legal officer of Sri Lanka is appointed by His excellency the President. He is the chief of the department of Attorney General. Some of his functions are as follows:

1. Power to grant pardon on the most obvious evidence and other matters in the cases that can be exclusively heard by the high court.

2. Giving approval for filing some cases in criminal courts.

3. Powers to summon some officers of government departments to his office and giving necessary advice to them.

4. Power to take legal actions against government servants who treat the public unfairly and those who are reluctant to mete out justice as well as those who ignore their duties.

5. Before a case is filed against a minister, secretary, or a government officer, it should be informed to Attorney General.

6. Power to confer the responsibility of Attorney General to his representatives.

7. Power to release convicts when enough evidences are not available.

8. Taking the responsibility on the constitutionality of bills submitted to parliament.

Functions of Attorney General are as follows:

Providing H.E. the president with the recommendations to exercise capital punishment against a convict

Providing necessary legal advice for the cases related to the government

Providing necessary legal advice for the bills submitted to parliament

Appearing on behalf of cases related to government and government institutions

Participating as a party in the cases heard by supreme court

Filling all legal affairs done by the government or those against the government

Diagram 1.7 Functions of Attorney General

For free distribution

16

There are few officers who are helpful in fulfilling powers and function of Attorney General.

Attorney General

Solicitor General

Additional Solicitor General

Deputy Solicitor General

Senior advocates of the government

Government advocates

Diagram 1.8 Officers who assist the Attorney General

Activity 1.4

²² Evaluate the functions of Minister of Justice, Chief Justice and Attorney General.

Alternative methods of resolving disputes

Several alternative methods have been established in Sri Lanka before going to a judiciary to resolve a problem. It provides an opportunity for the people to save their money, time and labour while getting an immediate solution which is agreeable to both parties. Some of those methods are as follows.

Arbitration

Problems arised between employers and employees are harmful for the respective institution as well as for the existence of the country. Working on solving those disputes within a legal framework is known as the arbitration. Industrial settlement Act of 1950 can be used for that.

For free distribution

17

Settlement can be classified into two on the basis of the way it takes place.

Compulsory Arbitration Voluntary Arbitration

Arbitration

Resolving problem by the parties after informing the commissioner of labour affairs through an arbitrator named by them.

It is known as the settlement made by force. Settling dispute through a person appointed by the Minister of Justice using his powers.

Diagram 1.9 – Methods of arbitration

An individual who discuss with both parties related to a dispute and come to a resolution is called an arbitrator. One or more arbitrators may involve in the arbitration procedure.

In the process of arbitration, a report on dispute is given to the arbitrator by the commissioner of labour. The arbitrator contents an investigation of dispute that should be finished within a reasonable time frame. If there are other parties related to the dispute, they should also participate in it. The decision is given after obtaining the ideas of both parties. The decision should be published in Gazette by the commissioner of labour to ensure the legality. The parties can also reject the decision.

Ombudsman

The post of Ombudsman or parliamentary commissioner for administration has been established in order to safeguard the fundamental rights and other rights of citizens from being violated by the executive or administrative affairs.

This post was introduced by the constitution of 1978. He performs two main duties.

I. Preventing the violation of fundamental rights of all citizens.

II. Protecting citizens from all administrative injustice.

For free distribution

18

He is appointed by H.E. the President. He can hold the post as long as he is of good health and conduct. The salary is paid through consolidated fund and it cannot be diminished during his term of the office. He can be removed by H.E. the President through a parliament resolution. After 1994, any citizen can complain directly to the Ombudsman.

Activity 1.5

²²Prepare a report after collecting information about the functions of a conciliation board in your area. Mention merits and demerits of it too.

Human Rights Commission

Every individual has a right to safeguard his human rights. It will be discussed at length in the chapter on Human Rights and duties. A person can complain to the Human Rights Commission about violations of human rights and get a relief. This commission has been established through the Act number 2 of 1996. It comprises of 20 members and they are appointed by H.E.the president.

Main functions of the commission are as follows

1. Making people aware of human rights

2. Giving advice to the government on fundamental rights

3. Hearing the complaints on violation of human rights and giving solutions

4. Being watchful about executive and administrative affairs so that human rights are safeguarded

5. Giving advice to the government to make national laws and policies according to international principles on human rights

6. Giving advice to the government about the need to enter into international treaties relevant to human rights

Powers of Human Rights Commission are as follows

²²Inspecting the violation of Human Rights and interfering in judicial affairs

²²Establishing sub committees relevant to human rights in principle level

For free distribution

19

²²Making recommendations after examining those who are imprisoned through a court order or in any other ways

²²Conducting programmes to promote human rights

²²Providing a reasonable compensation for those whose human rights are violated

Councelling and conciliation are two other methods followed which have already been discussed in citizenship education book of grade 10 under the topic 'methods of conflict resolution' (page 96 – 104). Thus, they are not discussed here.

Activity 1.6

²²Write the advantages that individuals, institutions and society in common get by the use of alternative ways to solve disputes.

Rule of Law

Rule of law means ruling a country on the basis of the supremacy of the law. Every individual and institution is expected to work according to the law. Constitutional law is the most supreme law in our country and everyone is obliged to work according to it.

G. Martial has also mentioned about three characteristics that influence the rule of law.

Features that influence the concept of rule of law

Enforcement of law through an independent judiciary with equity and equality

Everyone being subject to the law

Availability of an impartial, specific, reasonable, just, common system of law

Diagram 1.10 – Features that influence the rule of law

For free distribution

20

According to the above qualities some of the features seen in a society where the rule of law has been established are as follows:

²²Availability of an independent judicial system

²²Awareness of every citizen about law

²²Not treating ignorance of the law as an excuse

²²Dispensing law impartially without any delay

²²Not exercising law on the basis of status, profession, wealth or any other matters

²²Treating everyone equally before the law

²²Not exerting influence on judges in their decision making

When this concept is exercised, the extreme conditions that can badly affect individuals can be minimized so that a fair and just society can be established.

Independence of the Judiciary

Fig 1.3 Athena

Judiciary occupies a significant place in modern society. The reason is the priority given for judiciary for safeguarding rights and freedom as well as to ensure justice and equity.

When the judiciary is independent and impartial, a confidence is built up in individuals about judiciary. People tend to live while respecting law under such conditions. Constitution of 1978 has provided many provisions to safeguard independence of judiciary.

The use of goddess Athena as the symbol of judicial affairs, indicates the fact that it functions with an equity, impartiality in a moderate manner. Some of the provisions introduced to safeguard independence of judiciary are as follows:

For free distribution

21

²²Appointment of judges

Judges are appointed by H.E. the President under the recommendation of the constitutional council. The age of retirement is mentioned and they cannot be removed before it. They can hold the post as long as they are in good health.

²²Removal of judges

There has been a special procedure proposed in the constitution. This procedure also expects to ensure job security. So that they can give Judgements independently and impartially.

²²Salaries of judges

Salaries are paid to the judges through a consolidated fund. It is also a step to safeguard independence of judiciary. Accordingly, the budget has no reference to the allocations related to judges. Salaries of the judges of Supreme Court and Court of Appeal are decided by the parliament.

²²Accepting other positions

According to the constitution it is strictly prohibited for the judges of Supreme Court or Court of Appeal to accept any other paid or non paid post without approval of the H.E. President. They should not be employed in any other profession.

This also prevails as a provision to ensure the independence of judiciary.

²²Restriction of unnecessary involvements and control.

To ensure independent judiciary, infaluencing judicial affairs was determined to be a punishable offence. Judges can function without being subject to any other influences due to this provision.

²²Establishing judicial service commission

Establishment of judicial service commission is also a step to safeguard the independence of judiciary. Chief Justice is the President of this commission while two other judges are members. Members are appointed by H.E. the President for a period of five years.

For free distribution

22

Activity 1.7

²²Do you think judiciary should be independent? State 5 reasons supporting it.

Importance of dispensing law impartially without any delay

Taking much time for a trial can lead to dilute the confidence of citizens about the law and judiciary. Drawbacks or delay of dispensing justice can make an injustice for those who are affected.

Some of the demerits of unnecessary delay and not dispensing justice impartially are as follows:

²²Decline of the confidence of individuals on judicial system and the law

²²Rise of anarchy instead of the law

²²Increase of crime and corruptions in the country

²²Deterioration of equity and equality of law in the country.

²²Tendency to use illegal methods to achieve justice

²²Spending much money and time to fulfill the justice

²²Decline of people's respect to judiciary and the law

Independence of judiciary and dispensing justice efficiently with equity are essential to minimize above situations and to achieve the concept of good governance in the country.

It is also a prime duty of the citizens to work while respecting the law and judicial system of the country peacefully. Every citizen should abide by law since it is a tool that prefects peaceful and justifiable societies.

Activity 1.8

²²Discuss the importance of living as a law abiding citizen.

For free distribution

23

02

Various Strata of the

Government

Introduction

The prime responsibility of a democratic government is to fulfill the needs of citizens to the maximum level. It is important to study various strata of the government and their functions to know the extent to which the government fulfills the responsibilities. Human needs are complex in the modern society and the function of government has also become complex in relation to these needs. These complex set of functions are performed by various bodies at different levels of government.

This unit will discuss three main levels of government; the central government, provincial councils and local authorities. The main areas to be focussed are:

²²Comparison of past and present structure of these bodies.

²²Functions of these bodies at each level, the effectiveness of their activities and problems faced by them in practice.

²²In exercising the functions of those different bodies at each level, the benefits, accountability and responsibility of respective bodies, as well as the duties and responsibilities of the citizens who are benefitted have also been emphasized.

In this unit students are expected to improve competencies regarding the features and characteristics of different levels of the government, their functions, effectiveness as well as the obligations of citizens with respect to them.

The system of government in Sri Lanka at present is a liberal democratic and unitary system. Unitary system of government means a system in which powers are centered around the central authority. It is also defined as a government

For free distribution

24

in which all executive, legislative and judicial powers are exercised by a single central government.

²²Fundamental feature of a unitary government is that one central authority possesses the supreme power of enacting law

- A. V. Dicey

²²A unitary government has two fundamental features

1. The supremacy of the central government

2. The absence of subsidiary sovereign bodies

- C. N. Strong

Developed countries such as Great Britain, Japan, France as well as developing countries such as Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal are examples of unitary states.

Sri Lanka has a unitary system of government. It has a long history of a central and local government system. Even in the past there had been regional administrative units in addition to the central government. Those units were,

²²Uththara Passa

²²Pracheena Passa

²²Dakkhina Passa

²²Pashchima Passa

By the end of Anuradhapura era there were several administrative units, namely, Rajarata, Dhakkina Desha, Dolos Dahas Rata, Ata Dahas Rata. During the British colonial period there were administrative units known as Disava, Korala, Patthu etc.

For free distribution

25

Important changes introduced by the British colonial rulers in Sri Lanka

Official - 09

Unofficial - 06

The Legislative Council

European - 03

Sinhala - 01

Tamil - 01

Burgher - 01

Colebrooke Reforms – 1833

Official - 11 Unofficial - 10

The Legislative Council

Educated Ceylonese - 01

European - 02

Burgher - 01

Crew – Mc- Cullum Reforms - 1910

Elected - 04Nominated - 06

Low countrySinhala - 02

UpcountrySinhala - 01

Tamil - 02

Muslim - 01

For free distribution

26

Official - 14 Unofficial - 23

The Legislative Council (37)

 European - 02

 Burgher - 01

 Chamber of commerce - 01

 Low country producers

association - 01

On the basis of ethnicity

and professions - 05

Elected - 16Nominated - 07

As officers

05

Nominated bythe govenor09

From territorial representation - 11

 Colombo - 01

 Western Province - 02

 All other provinces each for

each province 1x8=8

 Upcountry Sinhala - 02

 Muslim - 01

 Indian Tamil - 01

 Special - 03

Manning Reforms – 1921

On territorial

representation - 50

Nominated by the

Governor - 08

The State Council

 Chief Secretary

 Financial Secretary

 Legal Secretary

Donoughmore Reforms – 1931

Officers of State -03

For free distribution

27

Constitutional reforms introduced by the British in 1833, 1910, 1921, 1924 did not include a right of internal self determination. However Donoughmore reforms provided a relatively better opportunity for Sri Lankans to participate in politics. Universal Franchise, Executive Committee System National State Council, were some of the democratic proposals that marked a turning point in political history of Sri Lanka.

House of Representatives - 101Senate - 30

A bicameral legislature

 Elected through Universal Franchise - 95

 Nominated by Governor General- 06

Soulbury Constitutional Reforms - 1947

 Elected by the votes of House of Representatives (15)

 Nominated by the Governor General on the advice of Prime minister - 15

Some of the merits of this constitution are as follows:

²²Independence was obtained from the British Empire on the 4th February 1948

²²Indroducing a cabinet

²²Introducing a two house parliament

²²Introducing the post of governor general representing the Queen

²²Accepting the British prime council as the supreme court of appeal

²²Establishment of the Public Service and Judicial Service Commissions

²²Paying special attention to minority rights

Drafting the First Republican Constitution of 1972

 Abolishing dominion status and the formation of an independent Republic

 Naming the unicameral legislature as National State Assembly

 Abolishing the post of Governor General and introducing the post of President

 Accepting Supreme Court as final and the apex court of Sri Lanka

For free distribution

28

 Establishment of Constitutional Court

 Establishment of Public Service Advisory Board, Public Service Disciplinary Board, Judicial Service Advisory Board and Judicial Service Disciplinary Board

 Including a Chapter on Fundamental Rights for the first time

Second Republican Constitution of 1978

²²Introducing a post of Presidency with Executive Powers.

²²Introducing a Board of Ministers and a Prime minister headed by an Executive President

²²Introducing Proportional Representation system by abolishing Simple Majority system

²²Introducing a Parliament comprised of 225 members of which 196 members are elected from universal suffrage and 29 members are elected from national list

²²Re-introducing Public Service Commission and Judicial Service Commission

²²Introducing Fundamental Rights Chapter with provisions to safeguard them

²²Introducing the post of Commissioner on Parliament Affairs (Ombudsman)

At present Sri Lanka has been divided into nine provinces and twenty five administrative districts. They are as follows.

Western Province - 1. Colombo

2. Gampaha

3. Kaluthara

Central Province - 4. Kandy

5. Matale

6. Nuwara Eliya

Southern Province - 7. Galle

8. Matara

9. Hambantota

For free distribution

29

Northern Province - 10. Jaffna

11. Kilinochchi

12. Mannar

13. Vavuniya

14. Mullaithivu

Eastern Province - 15. Batticaloa

16. Ampara

17. Trincomalee

North Western Province - 18. Kurunegala

19. Puttalam

North Central Province - 20. Anuradhapura

21. Polonnaruwa

Uva Province - 22. Badulla

23. Monaragala

Sabaragamuwa Province - 24. Rathnapura

25. Kegalle

For free distribution

30

Northern

Eastern

Uva

Central

Southern

Sabaragamuwa

Western

North Western

North Central

Map 2.1 - Provinces of Sri Lanka

For free distribution

31

Map 2.2 - Administrative districts of Sri Lanka

For free distribution

32

Provincial Council System of Sri Lanka

Several attempts have been made to decentralize administrative powers of Sri Lanka as follows:

²²Report of Donoughmore Commission in 1928.

²²Report of Soulbury Commission in 1945.

²²Rata Sabha Bandaranayake – Chelvanayagam Pact - 1957

²²District Councils Dudley Senanayake – Chelvanayagam Pact -1965

²²District Development Councils in 1980.

13th Amendment and Provincial Council Act No.42 of 1987 provided constitutional and legal provisions for the formation of Provincial Councils. According to the constitution of 1978, the provisions were introduced to set up a Provincial Council for each province. According to 8th schedule of the constitution of 1978, the country has been divided into nine provinces.

Provincial Councils are formed in order to decentralize Executive, Legislative and Judicial powers concentrated in the Central Government. “Provincial Councils” are comprised of representatives elected from direct votes of the people.

Local Government System in Sri Lanka

Historical facts prove the fact that Local Authories in Sri Lanka has a long history. Some of the examples are as follows:

²²Those who held some responsibilities were called by titles such as Gamika, Parumaka, Gambojaka. Mayors were called as Nagara guttika

²²According to Wewalkatiya Inscription, there has been a ruling system called “Dasa Gam Palanaya” or ruling by taking ten villages as a single administrative unit

²²Even in Kandyan Kingdom the same type of administrative system prevailed

²²It has been reported that the Kandyan Kingdom had been divided into 04 'maha disa', 08 'disa' and 09 'rata'

For free distribution

33

²²Reports of Robert Knox in 1681 prove that the village had been ruled by a village council or a gam sabha

Obtaining the people’s participation in administrative affairs and preparing central government’s policies on the basis of the views of the people in localities are the functions expected from local government bodies. These local government bodies are classified as regional and urban and they are comprised of representatives elected by the people. The function of these bodies is to exercise powers of central government in regional level. Different types of local government bodies has been formed in Sri Lanka in order to achieve a formal community development in order to ensure more efficient community service.

²²Establishing Municipal Councils under Municipal Council Act in 1865- Colombo-Kandy-Galle

²²Establishing Gam Sabha under the Ordinance of 1934

²²Establishing Urban Councils under the Ordinance in 1939

²²Establishing Town Councils under the Ordinance of 1956

²²Establishing District Development Councils by abolishing Town Councils and Gamsabha in 1980

²²Establishing Pradeshiya Sabha in 1987

Local government system is practised in Sri Lanka in order to delegate administrative affairs of the central government so as to fulfill the public needs and requirements more efficiently.

Central Government, Provincial Councils and Local Authorities are the main tiers of the administrative mechanism of Sri Lanka.

Reasons for decentralizing powers of the government to regional units

Provincial Council system and Local Authorities in Sri Lanka have been established for decentralizing powers of Central Government. The objectives of devolving power on regional level administrative units are,

²²Conferring powers to people in provincial level within a unitary structure²²Ensuring cultural and language identities of people in provincial level

For free distribution

34

²²Accelerating development and administrative activities in each province and making day to day affairs of the people easy

²²Accelerating regional development

²²Indentifying regional resources and using them efficiently

²²Expanding participation of the people in administrative affairs

²²The fulfilment of basic needs of the people

²²Establishment of administrative units closer to the public

²²Uplifting the status of regional leadership and providing opportunities for national and young leadership

²²Minimizing workload of the Central Government

Problems in decentralizing powers

²²Some regional units are benefited while some other units are not, due to the disparity in distribution of resources

²²Lack of knowledge of the people about the ways of getting their needs fulfilled

²²Problems arising from the execution of power between the central government and regional units

²²Inadequate power devolved on the Provincial Councils and the Local Authorities for the implemention of development programmes

²²Difficulties in allocation of funds for implementing development plans

²²Issues regarding transparancy and accountability emerge when a number of bodies are engaged in the same task

Activity- 2.1

²²Divide students of the class into several groups.²²Prepare a list of proposals introduced by constitutional reforms from 1833 - 1947.²²Let a student, selected randomly, present information he/ she collected creatively.

For free distribution

35

Activity - 2.2

²²Prepare a concept map indicating the changes of the number of members in Legislative Councils from 1833 - 1947.

²²Display the best work in the class room.

Activity - 2.3

²²Organize a debate to argue whether a Cabinet System of government or a Presidential System of government is suitable for our country.²²Select the panel of judges from the students.²²Let Grade Ten students to participate in it as the audience, if possible.

Powers and functions of Central Government, Provincial Councils and Local Authorities in Sri Lanka

²² Powers and functions of Central Government of Sri Lanka.

Central Government

Board of cabinetheaded by the executive president

Legislature(Parliament)Judicial system headed by supreme court

²²Controlling public

services

²²Defense affairs

²²Controlling state finance

²²Foreign affairs

²²Legislative affairs

²²Judicial functions²²Issuing orders and regulations.

²²Making laws

²²Providing majority

required by executive

²²Administration of the

executive

²²Controlling budget

²²Submitting grievances

²²Questioning

²²Making fair criticisms of

government activities

²²Interpreting laws

²²Dispensing justice

²²Advisory tasks

²²Safeguarding constitution

²²Functioning as a guardian

of the rights of citizens

²²Exercising special tasks

vested in supreme court

For free distribution

36

Executive

According to the second republican constitution of 1978, the president is the head of the state, government, executive, as well as the commander in chief of all armed forces.

Article 30 (1) of the constitution describes the post of Presidency as follows:

“Republic of Sri Lanka has a president, he is the head of the state, head of the executive, and the head of the government as well as the commander in chief of all armed forces.”

Legislative powers of the President under - 1978 Constitution

²²To summon, prorogue and to dissolve parliament

²²To make the Statement of Government Policy at the inaugural session of

Parliament

²²To direct special Bills for Referendums

Eg 1. Amending articles 1,2,3 6,7,8 9,10,11, 30(2), 62 (2)

2. Bills that the cabinet approves to be passed through a Referendum

3. Bills that the supreme court determines to be passed through a Referendum

²²Sanction the Bills passed through a Referendum.

²²Addressing the Parliament and sending messages to it.

Legislature of 1978 (Parliament)

The legislature under Second Republican Constitution is called Parliament. All 225 members of parliament represent the parliament as members of the legislature.

According to the constitution the Legislature is comprised of 196 members elected from 22 electoral districts and 29 members selected from National List.

For free distribution

37

²²Number of members elected by universal franchise - 196

²²Members elected from National List - 29

²²Total Number of members - 225

The term of the office of the parliament is six years as it is mentioned in the 1978 constitution. Representatives are elected through an election conducted once a five years.

Powers and functions of legislature (Parliament)

The first task of the first meeting of parliament is to elect a Speaker, DeputySpeaker , Chairman of Committees and Deputy Chairman of Committees from the votes of the members. The functions are as follows.

1' Making laws/ enacting laws

2' Controlling executive

3' Controlling finance

4' Questioning

5' Providing majority required by the executive

6' Submitting public grievances

7' Criticizing the actions of government reasonably

8' Contributing for the amendments of the Constitution

9' Bringing impeachment motions

10' Bringing motion of no-confidence

11' Training future leaders

12' Sanction Bills

Powers and functions of the Judiciary

There are many judicial institutions in Sri Lanka. It will be described in the unit Law and Justice. Functions of different judicial institutions are as follows.

1' Interpreting law

2' Trial, dispensing justice

3' Safeguarding rights of citizens

For free distribution

38

4' Safeguarding the Constitution

5. Resolving legal issues among provincial councils, local authorities and central government

6' Consultative tasks on legislation

Study powers and functions of Provincial Councils in the lesson “Decentralisation and devolution of power” on pages 45-47 in Citizenship Education Book of Grade – 10.

Structure, powers and functions of Local Authorities

Three types of local government bodies are in operation at present in Sri Lanka. They are,

²²Municipal councils²²Urban councils²²Pradeshiya Sabha \ Divisional council

Local government bodies have been set up for making development and welfare activities convenient and efficient in order to provide an efficient service for the people. Requirements at regional level can be identified easily through these bodies and an efficient service can be provided to the people.

²²Head of a municipal council – Mayor

²²Head of an urban council – Chairman

²²Head of pradeshiya sabha – Chairman

Members for these bodies are elected at an election held once in four years. Local government elections contribute to the emergence of political leaders from rural areas.

Activity 2.4-

²² Are there any representatives who have contested and won for pradeshiya sabha, urban councils and municipal councils and joined national politics? Discuss with your teacher.

For free distribution

39

Municipal Councils

Municipal councils have been set up under Municipal Council Ordinance No. 16 of 1947. Dilimitation and nomination of the council are done by the respective Minister in Charge of the subject. A municipal council is set up for an area with high level of urban characteristics. Currently, there are 23 municipal councils in Sri Lanka.

A municipal council consists of a Mayor, Deputy Mayor and members.

Powers of a Municipal Council

²²Providing water for the respective urban area

²²Providing electricity

²²Landscaping

²²Garbage disposal

²²Constructing new roads

²²Preparing housing schemes

²²Providing library facilities

²²Building community centers

²²Maintaining sports grounds and gymnasiums

²²Maintaining public lavatory units

²²Maintaining places of entertainment

²²Controlling affairs of scaling and measurements

²²Maintaining minor roads, public wells and bathing places, etc.

Urban councils

Urban councils have been set up under the Urban Council Ordinance No.61 of 1939. The minister in charge of the subject undertakes the tasks of declaring an Urban Council demarcating boundaries, and naming it. At present there are 41 Urban Councils. It is comprised of a Chairman, Deputy Chairman and the members. The powers vested on Municipal Councils are similar to powers vested on Urban Councils.

For free distribution

40

Pradeshiya Sabha / Divisional Councils

Pradeshiya Sabha have been set up under the Pradeshiya Sabha Act No 15 of 1987. Currently there are 271 Pradeshiya Sabha in Sri Lanka. Similar to Urban Councils and Municipal Councils, the minister in charge has power to decide boundaries, declare a Pradeshiya Sabha and decide a name for it. Mostly the boundaries of a Pradeshiya Sabha is limited to that of a Divisional Secretariat Division. Each Pradeshiya Sabha consists of a Chairman, Vice Chairman and the members. Majority of the people in Sri Lanka live in Pradeshiya Sabha territories. Most of the powers held by Municipal Councils, are also held by Pradeshiya Sabha.

Table 2.1 - Local government bodies in Sri Lanka - 2015

TotalPradeshiya SabhaUrban

council

Municipal councilProvince

48271407Western Province

43330604Central Province

49420403Southern Province

34280501Northern Province

45370503Eastern Province

33290301North Western Province26250001North Central Province28250102Uva Province

29250301Sabaragamuwa Province3352714123Total

For free distribution

41

The tasks assigned to Pradeshiya Sabha can be discussed under three main themes.

1. Public roads - Protect roads

- Maintaining them

- Construction

- Surveying and removing barriers and obstruction

- Laying pipes for pipelines and cleanings services

- Constructing byroads

2. Public health - Constructing and repairing public drainage systems

- Constructing and maintaining public lavatory units

- Maintaining sewerage system

- Removing unauthorized constructions

- Improving public health services

3. Public utility services - Providing electricity for public places

- Maintaining public markets

- Maintaining gardens, play grounds

- Providing water

- Maintaining public bathing places

- Maintaining public libraries

Uses of provincial councils and local government bodies

²²Possibility of identifying public utility services easily

²²Preparing the background for producing regional and national level leaders

²²Accelerating regional development activities productively

²²Maintaining health services and sanitary facilities in an organized manner

²²Providing education through pre schools and developing public health through maternity clinics and ayurvedic dispensaries

²²Providing necessary facilities for the smooth and productive enjoyment of leisure, entertainment and knowledge

For free distribution

42

Activity 2.5

²²Study the services rendered by the local government bodies in your area.

²²Organize a field trip to study one of the local government bodies

or

²² Invite an officer of a local government body and conduct a discussion about the services rendered by that local government body.

²²Prepare a booklet based on your trip under the topic, "Local government bodies and regional development."

Responsibility and accountability of different sections of the government on citizen

The prime responsibility of different parts of the government, namely, Central Government, Provincial Council as well as Local Authorities is to fulfill public needs to the maximum level while maintaining law and order.

Some of those responsibilities are as follows.

²²Ensuring national security by ensuring regional security

²²Ensuring national development by developing regional economy

²²Safeguarding law and order

²²Form wlating by laws and statutes to fulfil the needs of the public

²²Uplifting the glory of the nation

²²Environmental management and conservation

²²Protecting cultural heritages

²²Ensuring social reconciliation

²²Fulfilling public utility services in an organized manner

²²Planning and implementation of regional and national development activities

²²Maintaining, protecting and developing public property

²²Developing human resources and producing good leaders

For free distribution

43

Accountability means fulfilling one’s duty assigned to him/ her. Responsibility means the bond to fulfill accountability.

Duties and Responsibilics of the individuals towards Central Government, Provincial Councils and Local Authorities

Contribute to maintain national security

²²Engage in a productive profession

²²Minimize bribery and corruption

²²Safeguard freedom, equity and rights

²²Safeguard and use common facilities efficiently

²²Contribute to protect the glory and the heritages of Sri Lanka

²²Providing security, nutrition love and care for children, elderly people, the differently abled people and the sick

²²Refrain from misusing public welfare services and support to protect them

Helping social development and good governance

²²Resolve or contribute to prevent conflicts

²²Protect the identity of different ethnic groups and respect them

²²Tolerate views of others and act with equity

²²Solve problems peacefully through discussions by understanding the disadvantages of violence

²²Active participation in regional development and providing guidance.

²²Act honestly and accurately when obtaining disaster and relief services

Contribution to environmental management

²²Protecting natural environment and understanding the importance of it

²²Not contributing for destroying environment and preventing those who destroy it

For free distribution

44

²²Disposing garbage in a systematic and responsible manner

²²Refraining from emitting harmful, substances to environment

²²Live as a good citizen

As citizens of Sri Lanka we must love our motherland. National harmony should be ensured. We must always work with responsibility in a fair and just manner. It is also important to perform our duties to the country while being aware of responsibility of the country towards us. The main responsibility of each level of the government is to make public affairs easy. It is the people who work on behalf of people in these bodies. Therefore it is important to fulfill our duties while preventing bribery, corruption and wastage. The nation expects you to be an exemplary citizen who fulfills the responsibilities.

Activity 2.6

²²Each student should prepare a list containing duties of different strata of the government and responsibilities to be fulfilled by citizens.

²²Divide the class into several groups and discuss the information collected and arrange important facts in order.

²²Each group should present its activity to the class.

²²Prepare a poster including most important facts. Get the help of the teacher to display it in the classroom.

For free distribution

45

03

Human Rights and Duties

Introduction

Rights inherent to all human beings by birth without any discrimintion can be called human rights. Accordingly, being aware of human rights, accepting and respecting them, executing the duties related to human rights, not only being in the formation of a democratic society the welfare of the citizens but also establishes peace and equality in the society.

Hence, being aware of human rights and developing the skills of implementing them practically in social life are essential to live in society as a virtuous citizen. Studying this chapter thoroughly will be helpful for you to develop the competencies in you.

Human Rights

Rights inherent to all human beings by birth can be called as 'human rights'.Therefore, human rights accommodate living in the society as human beings with dignity and equality.

Being human is the primary and sole requirement to be entitled to human rights. We call this as humanity in common. Human rights have become the foundation protecting the dignity and the well being of human being. In a society which obstructs the enjoyment of human rights, difficulties arise in the maintenance of security and completion of human development. Accordingly, human rights are essential to protect the dignity and existence of human life.

In addition to that, the concept of human rights is universal which is based on equity and equality. Safeguarding democracy, upgrading the social status of citizens, and the growth of social justice as well as equality are the main components of a society where the rights are ensured.

For free distribution

46

(C

ivi

l,

Po

lit

ic

al

r

ig

ht

s)

(ec

on

om

ic,

s

oc

ia

l

an

d c

ult

ur

al

rig

ht

s)

Digram 3.1

H

u

m

a

n

ri

g

h

t

s

Ge

ne

r

a

l

hu

m

a

n

i

ty

Hu

ma

n

Ex

is

t

a

n

ce

H

u

m

a

n

Dignity

Important historical events in relation to achieving Human Rights

Though every individual is entitled to enjoy human rights, man has undergone several restrictions in different periods in the history when enjoying human rights. The age of slavery and medieval eras provided many examples of this situation.

With the gradual development of human society, man has focused his attention on his rights too. He had to fight against the rulers, struggle and enter into treaties with them in order to acquire his rights. Some of those important historical events of achievements of human rights are as follows.

Human Rights Charter

²²1215 AD - Magna Carta Treaty of Britain

²²1689 AD - British Bill of rights Act

For free distribution

47

²²1776 AD - United States Declaration of Independence

²²1789 AD - French Declaration of man and citizen

²²1917 AD - Russian Revolution

Thus it is obvious that man demands rights mainly due to his desire to spend a free and independent life. Therefore the process related to rights consists of two main aspects.

Those who demand for rightsThose who are bound to give rights

Rights

Digram 3.2 : -The Process related to Rights

The First World War began in 1914 and continued up to 1918. Then two decades later the Second World War began. It continued from 1939 to 1945. The result of these wars was destructive.

Hundreds of thousands of people died. Large number of people became disabled. Millions of children and women became helpless. Destruction of the property was immense. Therefore the world wars can be regarded as instances when human rights were severely violated.

Therefore the leaders of the world paid attention on maintaining world peace, improving co-existence among nations and safeguarding human rights. United Nations Organization was established in 1945 in order to fullfill these objectives. The organization paid great attention on safeguarding human rights. As a result, the Universal Declaration on Human Rights was passed in the General Assembly on the 10th Of February 1948. It was an important step for safeguarding human rights.

For free distribution

48

Universal Declaration of Human Rights of UNO – Article 01

²² All human beings are born free

²² They are equal in terms of dignity and rights

²² They should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood

²² They are endowed with reason and conscience

This declaration has clearly mentioned the fact that all human beings should be given rights on an equitable basis. It also emphasizes the duties to be fulfilled by man while enjoying these rights.

It is the duty of all of us to accept the fact that all are equally entitled to rights and our obligation is to enjoy these rights with responsibility and understanding. Fulfilling duties while enjoying rights directly contributes to social development. It ensures the existence of a democratic society. Therefore it is essential in social life to have knowledge about rights and duties as well as the way they are fulfilled.

United Nations General Assembly has made a request from school and educational institutions to exhibit these rights in order to raise awareness among people.

This request clearly indicates you, as students the importance of having knowledge about human rights. This knowledge provides an opportunity for you to spend a good life while enjoying rights. Performing one's duties related to rights contributes to safeguard rights of the other members of the society. By doing that, you can ensure the establishment of a democratic and peaceful society.

Activity 3.1

²²Prepare an article on the topic " the importance of raising awareness among students about Human Rights", to be displayed on school wall paper.

²²Select some important historical events important for achieving Human Rights and collect information about the rights achieved in those events.

For free distribution

49

Classification of Rights

Based on law, rights can be classified as follows.

Digram 3.3 : - Classification of Rights

H

u

m

a

n

r

i

g

h

t

s

R

i

g

h

t

s

F

u

n

d

a

m

e

n

t

a

l

r

i

g

h

t

s

Out of the Human rights which are essential to the human being, some of the main selected rights have been added to the constitutions by most of the countries. They are known as fundamental rights.

Accordingly every fundamental right is a human right but every human right is not a fundamental right. Once the fundamental rights are violated, One can get the refuge of the law.

Fundamental rights are mentioned in chapter III of the present constitution.Article 126 ensures the actions to be taken once the rights are violated.

Everyone is equally entitled to human rights and United Nations Organization has taken steps to safeguard the rights of special groups.

E.g. The steps taken to safeguard the rights of children and women

On the basis of the nature of the rights they can be classified as Civil, Political, Economic and Social rights.

For free distribution

50

Universal Declaration of Human Rights - UDHR

Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the United

Nations General Assembly on 10th of December 1948. This Declaration consists

of a Preamble and 30 Articles. The objectives of this Declaration can be understood

by studying the Preamble. These objectives are as follows:

²²Human Rights should be protected by Law.

²²It is essential to promote friendly relations between nations.

²²Determination to promote social progress and a better standard of life.

30 Articles of UN Human Rights Declaration are given below:

1' All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.

2' Everyone is entitled to all rights and freedom set forth in this declaration

without distinction of any kind such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, politics, property, birth or other status.

3' Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.

4' No one shall be held slavery, or servitude.

5' No one shall be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading

treatment or punishment.

6' Everyone has the right to recognition as a person before the law.

7' All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to

equal protection of the law.

8. Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent nations

tribunals for acts violating fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.

9. No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.

For free distribution

51

10. Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an

independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.

11. (i) Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty.

(ii) No heavier penalty shall be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the penal offence was committed.

12. Right to privacy

13. (i) Right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each

state.

(ii) Right to leave any country including his own and to return to his country.

14. Right to seek and enjoy in other countries asylum from prosecution.

15. Everyone has the right to a nationality.

16. Right to marry and found a family and entitled to protection by society and the State.

17. (i) Right to own property.

(ii) No one should be arbitrarily deprived of his property.

18. Right to freedom of thoughts, conscience and religion.

19. Right to freedom of opinion and expression, and the right to freedom of seeking, receiving and imparting information.

20. Right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.

21. Right to take part in the government of his own country directly or freely

chosen representatives and the right to equal access to public service in his country.

22. Right to social security.

23. Right to equal pay for equal work, and join trade unions.

24. Right to rest and leisure.

25. Right to a standard of living including food, clothing, housing, medical care and necessary social services.

For free distribution

52

26' Right to education. Only primary and secondary education should be pro

vided free of charge.

27' Right to participate in cultural, scientific and aesthetic affairs.

28' Right to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms

set forth dependence mentioned in this declaration.

29' ^i& The fact that there are several social obligations to be fulfilled by every

individual.

^ii& Rights and independence of the individuals should be enjoyed so that those of the others are safeguarded.

30' No actions should be taken in order to violate the rights and obligations of the declaration.

All the rights mentioned above can be classified as,

²²Civil and Political rights²²Economic, Social and Cultural rights

Human rightsCivil rights

Social rights

Economic

rights

Cultural rights

Political

rights

Digram 3.4 :- Classification of Human Rights

For free distribution

53

Human Rights

Civil and Political RightsEconomic, Social and cultural rights

²² Rights to life, thinking and

personal security²² Right to freedom from slavery and servitude²² Right to freedom from cruel, inhuman treatment ²² Right to a fair trial of a case²² Right to recognition as a person before the law²² Right to travelling²² Right to get asylum abroad²² Right to freedom of thoughts, conscience and religion²² Right to freedom of opinion expression²² Right to join the countries rule, directly or through a representative and satisfactory life

²² Right to education

²² Right to work and the right to obtain equal wages for equal work

²² Right to form trade unions and join them

²² Right to getting vacation and leaves

²² Right to foods, clothes

²² Right to participate in cultural, scientific, aesthetic activities

²² Rights to social security

²² Right to own property

²² Right to enjoy a sufficient standard of living

The United Nations have passed two covenants in 1966 to give a legal status to the Declaration on Human Rights and to draw the attention of the member countries on it.

 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

An optional agreement was passed related to the international convention on civil and political rights. Details of those conventions have been given below.

For free distribution

54

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights - (ICCPR)

This convention was passed in 1966 as a separate convention to safeguard the Civil and political rights referred to in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. Once this convention was passed by the member countries, they are obliged to adopt it within their own countries. some of the rights certified by this convention are as follows.

²² Right to life

²² Right to freedom from cruel inhuman, degrading treatment or punishment

²² Right to freedom from arbitrary arrest

²² Right to be recognized as a person before the law

²² Right to freedom from the punishments given through the laws with retrospective effects

²² Right to personal freedom and security

²² Right to freedom from slavery

²² Right to a fair trial

²² Right to follow any religion

²² Right to peaceful assembly

²² Right to cast votes in elections

²² Right to be elected as a people's representative

An optional convention was passed in 1966 with the convention on civil and political rights. It is the first optional protocol which is related to interna-tional convention on political and civil rights.

The second optional protocol aimed at abolishing capital punishment was passed in 1989. These two optional protocols are as follows.

The First Optional Protocol to the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR)

This optional protocol consists of 14 articles. This optional protocol has provided an opportunity to complain the Human Rights Committee set up by the protocol, in case where a person is not satisfied with final result of the judicial process concerning the violation of Human Rights in his own country.

In order to make this kind of a complaint to the Human Rights Committee, the respective country where the particular person lives, should have signed and accepted this protocol.

For free distribution

55

The Second Optional Protocol was added to ICCPR with the objectives of abolishing capital punishment

This protocol was passed by the General Assembly of UNO on the 15th of December, 1989. This has been introduced in addition to Article 3 of Human Rights Declaration of UNO and Article 6 of ICCPR. It consists of eleven articles. This optional protocol has taken steps to abolish capital punishment.

It is strictly prohibited for the countries that accept this protocol to give any kind of a capital punishment to any person living in those countries. In place of that some alternative punishments can be imposed. Sri Lanka has not signed this protocol yet.

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights - (ICESCR)

This covenant has been passed in order to implement the following rights in Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a separate protocol.

Once this protocol is accepted by a country, it is bound to protect them.

Optional Protocol to the ICESCR - 2008

An Optional Protocol was signed in 2008 to strengthen the following rights recognized in ICESCR.

International Bill of Rights

There are six main legal documents passed by the United Nations to safeguard, interpret and assure Human Rights. When all these documents are taken together the Bill of Rights is formed. Accordingly the documents related to the Bill of Rights are as follows.

• Right to education

• Right to a healthy life

• Right to select an employment opportunity freely

• Right to getting a reasonable salary

• Right to social security

• Right for a higher standard of life

• Right for living in accordance with one's cultural accepted values.

For free distribution

56

1' Universal Declaration of Human Rights of UNO – 1948

2' International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights – 1966

3' International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – 1966

4' The First Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

5' The Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

6' Optional Protocol to Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights – 2008

Activity 3.2

²²International Human Rights Day is celebrated on the 10th of December in every year. Prepare a speech to be presented in the morning assembly on the topic "International Acts on Human Rights".

In the present day, it is accepted that the rights discussed above should be ensured with respect to each individual and as a group. Accordingly groups of people who face problems are recognized. They are paid special attention and various international documents on human rights have been passed to ensure their human rights.

Rights of Women

Family is the smallest social unit of a community of people. The functions performed by the women as a mother of the family is invaluable. Through functions like giving birth to children, giving protection to them, fulfillment of food and nutrition requirements of the family, and providing education to them, the mother performs a great service to the welfare of the family as well as the wellbeing of the society.

The labour contribution of the women with regard to the functions of the family and the national economy is commendable. She also performs a very important social service by shouldering various responsibilities associated with different roles played by her in the society.

For free distribution

57

We know about special occasions even in the past in which the women in the Oriental Countries had been regarded important. The Sapta Aparihani Dharma seven factors of non degeneration, practised during the reign of Lichchavi in the 6th Century B.C. in India can be taken as an example. Two of the facts under Sapta Aparihani Dharma deal with the fact providing protection to women. Those two facts followed by the Lichchavi kings are given below:

1. Protection of maidens

2. Protection of the married women

Fundamental reason for the society to pay much attention towards women is the respect for motherhood which has been prevailing in the society from ancient times.

Fig. 3.1 :- Social services rendered by women

When enjoying human rights there are many occasions in which women face social discrimination at present. Being subjected to violence, facing various types of abuses and being subjected to discrimination are some examples of such situations.

Considering women as a group which should attract special attention of the society the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) was adopted in 1979 by the United Nations General Assembly with the idea of securing the rights guaranteed by the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

For free distribution

58

Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women

The primary objective of this convention was the eradication of all forms of discrimination against women. This convention was adopted on the 18th of December 1979 by the United Nations and implemented on the 03rd of September 1987. Sri Lanka also ratified this convention. Article 3 of this convention is given below. Study it well.

Article 03

State Parties shall take in all fields, in particular in the political, social, economic and cultural fields, all appropriate measures, including legislation, to ensure the full development and advancement of women, for the purpose of guaranteeing them the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms on a basis of equality with men.

Under this convention the rights of women are arranged in several parts.

²²Civil and Political Rights of women

²²Rights of women within the family unit

²²The right to education and training

²²The right to engage in economic activities and enjoy the benefits

²²The right for health and nutrition

²²The right to protection against discrimination

It is emphasized that when these rights are enjoyed by women the opportunity should be given to them on the basis of elimination of all forms of

discrimination against women and on gender equality.

For free distribution

59

Article 10

State Parties shall take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against women in order to ensure to them equal rights with men in the field of education and in particular to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women.

Article 15

State parties shall accord to women equality with men before law.

Sri Lanka has signed this Convention in 1981. Accordingly, Sri Lanka has taken several measures for the protection of women’s rights.

²²Preparation of a women’s Charter in 1993 based on this Convention

²²Establishment of a separate ministry concerning women’s affairs.

²²Establishment of National Women’s Committee on matters relating to unfair treatment to women.

²²Inclusion of provisions to the Penal Code dealing with wrongs committed against women.

²²Passing of an Act of Parliament on Domestic violence dealing with violent acts that take place within home so that family members including women are protected.

²²In every police station a separate section for women and children is established to investigate matters dealing with women and children.

An alternative agreement to the CEDAW Convention was adopted by the United Nations on 06th October 1999.

Activity 3.2

²²Collect some poems/songs/essays that reflect good qualities of mothers/ women.

²²Write an essay on “The role that should be played by the society in protecting the rights of women”.

For free distribution

60

Child Rights

Children are the greatest asset of parents. They are also the most valuable resource of a country and the world. The reason for this is the fact that they are considered the back bone of the nation. Therefore it is important to direct children through a better present to a beneficial future.

If children are deprived of the opportunity to enjoy their rights it becomes a barrier for their proper growth. It may hinder the child from entering the future society as a good citizen.

Employing children as child labourers, abusing them, recruiting them as child soldiers, abducting, not sending them to schools, harassing them are examples for the instances of child rights violations.

Children become victims of war in countries where they undergo harasments, lose parents, become refugees, get killed, suffer from malnutrition and expose to severe threats. First and second world wars are examples of such dreadful situations.

Such dreadful situations compelled the world to focus its attention on the need to safeguard rights of children.

In consequence of various efforts made by countries to safeguard child rights, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Convention on Child Rights on the 20th November 1989. This Convention came into effect since 1991. Sri Lanka also ratified this convention.

The United Nations Charter on Human Rights, Geneva Declaration on Child Rights (1924) and many other international documents were considered when drafting the convention on Child Rights.

Fig. 3.2 :- Children affected by war

For free distribution

61

United Nation's Convention on Child Rights

The Convention on Child Rights consists of a preamble and 54 articles.

When preparing this convention, special attention was paid to matters such as survival, protection, development and participation of the child.

D

e

v

e

l

o

p

m

e

n

t

S

u

r

v

i

v

a

l

P

a

r

t

i

c

i

p

a

t

i

o

n

P

r

o

t

e

c

t

i

o

n

Fig. 3.3 The Convention on Child Rights has been prepared on the basis of four principles. These guiding principles represent underlying requirements of all rights mentioned in this Convention.

For free distribution

62

Best Interests

of the child

Survival and development

The right to life and participation

Non

discrimination

Digram 3.5

Convention on the Rights of the Child

Article 1

A child means every human being below the age of eighteen years.

You also fall into this age limit. Therefore you should be well aware of the rights you are entitled to and when you enjoy these rights, you should also fulfill the duties and responsibilities that are given with them.

According to this Article no one should be discrimintated during the enjoyment of these rights on the basis of his or her nationality, community, religion, wealth, disability or on any other circumstances.

You receive these rights on equal basis with other children who live in the Sri Lankan muilti cultural society. It is your duty to work in a way that the rights of other children are protected.

Article No 02 states that childen should not be subjected to any kind of discrimination when enjoying the rights declared by this convention.

For free distribution

63

Article 3

In all actions concerning children the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.

Article 6

State Parties recognize that every child has the inherent right to life.

It is the duty of all persons living in society to respect children's right to life. All citizens should consider as it a personal duty and a responsibility of them. Then it will contribute to safeguard child rights further.

Article 7

The child should be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name the right to acquire a nationality and as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.

Article 35

State parties shall take all appropriate national, bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent the abduction of, the sale of or traffic in children for any purpose or in any form.

The abduction or detention of children results in mental depression in children, losing the right to education, deprivation of protection and love of parents, and bereavement of health facilities.Accordingly, such situations directly influence child rights violations It is the duty and the responsibility of the entire society to prevent children facing such situations.

Article 28

Every child has a right to education. It is a responsibility of the state to make primary education compulsory and available free to all.

For free distribution

64

As a citizen of Sri Lanka you have been facilitated with free education from primary to higher education. Use this privilege to educate yourself well. Determine yourself to dedicate the knowledge and skills you gained in this manner to develop to country and the community so that you will be able to accomplish your obligations and responsibilities that accompany with those rights.

A set of rights assured by the Convention on Child Rights is given below:

²²The right to freedom of expression

²²The right of the child to freedom of thought, conscience and religion

²²The rights of the child to freedom of association and freedom of peaceful assembly

²²The right to access information and material from a diversity of national and international sources, especially those aimed at the promotion of his or her social, spiritual and moral well-being and physical and mental health

²²The right of a mentally or physically disabled child to enjoy a full and decent life, to receive special protection, and education

²²The right to benefit from social security, including social insurance

²²The right of every child to a standard of living adequate for the child's physical, mental, spiritual, moral and social development

²²The right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and nutrition

²²In those States in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities or persons of indigenous origin exist, a child belonging to such a minority or who is indigenous shall not be denied the right, in community with other members of his or her group, to enjoy his or her own culture, to profess and practise his or her own religion, or to use his or her own language.

²²The right of the child to rest and leisure, to engage in play and recreational activities appropriate to the age of the child and to participate freely in cultural life and the arts.

²²The right of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the

For free distribution

65

child's education, or to be harmful to the child's health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.

²²The right to be protected from the illicit use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances

²²The right to be protected from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse

²²The right to protection and care of children who are affected by an armed conflict and be free from recruiting into armed forces as child soldiers

It states many responsibilities of the member states to be performed in order to offer maximum benefit to the child. A few of them are mentioned below.

²²Ensure the persistence and development of the child

²²Safeguarding family relationships

²²Providing security for children who are deprived of family protection

²²Providing social protection

²²Enforcement of laws so that maximum benefit is offered to the child

²²Preventing the recruitment of child soldiers for military activities.

²²Ensuring the right to education

Steps taken by Sri Lanka to safeguard Child Rights

²²Accepting and exercising United Nations Convention on Child Rights.

²²Making laws on the basis of the convention on Child Rights.

²²Establishment of National Child Protection Authority and empowering it to take actions against child rights violations

²²Establishment of the Department of Probation and Childcare services

²²Establishing a unit in every police station to investigate into the complaint related to women and children

²²Establishing Child Line Sri Lanka to obtain advices on child protection

²²Child line Sri Lanka 1929.

For free distribution

66

Activity 3.3

²²Mention the obligations you should fulfill as a child enjoying the following rights

²²Select three rights you are entitled to from the Convention of Child Rights and explain how they can be of assistance to succeed in your life.

RightsObligations to be fulfilled forenjoying the rights

Freedom of religious faith

Right to education

Right to equality

Right to freedom of association

Persons with Special needs

Capabilities are not equal in every person living in the society. There are some persons living with us in this society who suffer from conditions of disabilities such as physical, mental, intellectual disabilities. Perhaps these disabilities may be inborn. Or else, they may have been the result of accidents faced by them later in their life.

Eventhough they are disabled, like other ordinary people living in the society, they too have specific capabilities, proficiencies and skills. You may have heard about visually impaired persons who have excelled in certain capabilities such as in aesthetics. You may also know about situations in which persons with certain disabilities perform great service to the country after completing their education through specific methods.

By improving the capabilities of persons with disabilities they will get the ability to perform a great service to the country.

The United Nations have taken steps to protect the rights of persons with disabilities by paying special attention to them. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities adopted in 2006 is an important step taken for the protection of rights of persons with disabilities. The Convention on the Rights of Children has also taken further steps to protect the rights of persons with disabilities.

For free distribution

67

It is the responsibility of all of us as citizens to provide the persons with disabilities the opportunity to lead a satisfied social life with dignity by enjoying their rights.

Activity 3.4

²²State several obligations that should be fulfilled by the society for the protection of the dignity of the persons with disabilities.

²²Supply a short description of the facilities provided by the government to the persons with disabilities to lead a good life

The Indigenous and Tribal people

Indigenous people possess a culture specific to them. Food, clothing, customs, habits, language, beliefs and values, morals, etc. are examples of factors that reflect these specialities. Among them are arts like dancing and songs specific to them.

The World Labour Organization in 1989 introduced the Indigenous and Tribal People's Convention for the protection of rights of indigenous and tribal people. Recognizing the aspirations of these people to exercise control over their own institutions, ways of life and to maintain and develop their identities, languages and religions, within the framework of the States in which they live is one of the main objectives of this convention. According to this convention another main objective of it is to set up the background necessary for the maintenance of occupations, languages, customs and traditions, beliefs, ways of life further as they prevailed historically.

The aborigines living in Sri Lanka are called “Veddas”. It is the responsibility of all the citizens living in a country to treat these people as a special group and provide them with opportunities to enjoy the rights they have as aborigines and respect their rights.

For free distribution

68

Fig. 3.4 :- Indigenous people in Sri Lanka

Activity 3.5

²²Propose some measures to protect the rights of the indigenous people in Sri Lanka.

Elders (Senior citizens)

Even though there is no internationally recognized age limit to identify elders in Sri Lanka the retirement age for the state sector employees is between the ages of 55 - 60. This age group can be regarded as the border line to be considered as a senior citizen.

A senior citizen is a person who sacrificed his/her time and labour for the economic and social development of the country during his/her youth as a government servant, a private sector worker, a self-employed person or a person engaged in an employment abroad. They also have rendered a great service for the wellbeing of the society.

Accordingly, it is the responsibility of both the government and the society to provide them the opportunity to lead a good and satisfied life. it is quite essential to establish in the society the room for them as adults to lead a life which safeguards their freedom, independence, security and dignity. In the same way giving them the opportunity to use their knowledge, capabilities and experiences, for the benefit of

For free distribution

69

the society will help them to lead a contended life. This will also establish the right of them to take part in various social activities.

Various social insurance systems have been implemented out in Sri Lanka for the benefit of elders. Specially, it is the duty and responsibility of both the society and the family unit to provide opportunity for the adults to lead a happy and contended social life.

It is expected that in future, among Asian countries, including Sri Lanka the percentage of elderly population will take a higher value. Therefore, more attention should be given to the protection of their rights.

Domestically, Sri Lanka has passed an Act of Parliament for the Protection of Rights of Elders (No 09, 2000). Internationally, too, special attention is paid to the protection of rights of elders.

Activity 3.6

²²Name the activities you can carry out as a member of the family to provide opportunities for elders to lead a contended life.

²²Mention several steps that the government of Sri Lanka has taken for the welfare of elders.

Labour Rights

The services performed by working people in the development process of a country are immense. Therefore, it is essential to establish social fairness for the working population. Proper maintenance of employer - employee relationship is also essential for the development of a country.

International Labour Organization was established in 1919 with the objective of bringing social equity for the working population. In 1946 International Labour Organization functioned as an affiliated institution to the United Nations. The main objectives of the ILO are to promote rights at work, encourage decent employment opportunities, enhance social protection and strengthen dialogue on work-related issues. The ILO has adopted several Conventions with the objective of protecting

For free distribution

70

the rights of the workers. Sri Lanka has become a member of the ILO in 1948. Sri Lanka also has ratified and has taken steps to implement several conventions adopted by the ILO.

Protection of Labour Rights

Given below are the examples of some Acts passed and implemented by Sri Lanka with the objective of proper maintenance of relationship between employers and employees.

²²Shops and Office Employees Act

²²Maternity Benefits Ordinance

²²Industrial Disputes Act

²²Wages Board Ordinance

²²Employees Provident Fund Act

Opportunity should be given for the employees to enjoy the rights such as wages sufficient to meet their needs ( a living wage), holidays and leaves, job security, social security, health facilities, etc in order to perform their services with satisfaction.

If the employees are entitled to these rights it will lead to create healthy employer employee relationship, generate industrial peace and will also be able to maintain higher level of labour productivity.

When enjoying these rights fulfilling properly the obligations connected with them will lead to protect them further. Performing the duties and obligations towards the employees by the employers will be effective in bringing success to one’s industries and business services. Maintaining proper relationships between the employer and employees in this manner will contribute to success of the production process as well as the development of the country.

For free distribution

71

Activity 3.7

²²Mention in Column II the obligations that should be performed by the employees with respect to the enjoyment of the rights mentioned in columm I

Column IColumn II

Rights of the EmployeesObligations that should be fulfilled by the employees

Eight hour service duration

The right to have a fair salary

The right for leave

The right to join a Trade Union

Obligations connected with the Environmental Rights

The surroundings around us can simply be called the environment. Land, water, atmosphere, soil, plants and animals include the natural environment.

Since ancient times, man has opted to change the environment in various ways in order to fulfill his needs. The Industrial Revolution which started in the 18th Century caused environmental pollution in many ways. With the growth of population and human needs becoming complex the changes that took place in the production processes, too, influenced environmental pollution.

Pure drinking water, clean air, facilities essential to live in an unpolluted environment are the basic environmental rights which are necessary to safeguard the right to live.

However, the attempts made by man in order to upgrade the living conditions of him have unfavorably influenced environmental pollution.

“Human beings are at the centre of concerns for sustainable development. They are entitled to a healthy and productive life in harmony with nature.”

(Rio Declaration on Environment and Development: Principle 1)

For free distribution

72

This principle emphasizes both the right of man to the environment as well as obligations that man has to fulfill towards the environment. Because of this mankind is obliged to pay special attention to the fulfillment of certain duties and responsibilities in order to protect the environmental rights.

Fulfillment of moral obligations and acting in accordance with rules and regulations enacted In relation to such actions like protection of water sources, protection of forests and wild animals, proper disposal of waste matter will contribute to safeguard the environmental rights possessed by humankind.

The main law governing the environmental protection of Sri Lanka is the National Environmental Act of 1980. The central institution that deals with matters covered by this Act is the Central Environmental Authority.

Given below are some examples of institutions/departments that deal with environmental protection in Sri Lanka.

²²Ministry of Environment

²²Forest Conservation Department

²²The Geological Survey & Mines Bureau

²²The Marine Environment Protection Authority

²²Department of Wildlife Conservation

²²Coast Conservation & Coastal Resource Management Department

It is the duty and responsibility of all of us to act in accordance with the standards planned and implemented by these institutions and personally contributing to the conservation of the environment so as to establish the right to live in a healthy environment

For free distribution

73

Activity 3.8

²²Collect some newspaper reports on occasions where environmental pollution is taking place due to human activities.

²²Complete the following table.

Column IColumn IIColumn IIIColumn IVComponents of theEnvironmentHuman Activities that cause Environmental Pollution

Results ofEnvironmentalPollution

Measures that can be taken to prevent Environmental PollutionWater

Land

Atmosphere

Growth of the statutory provisions of Human Rights in Sri Lanka

Inclusion of Fundamental Rights chapter in the First Republican Constitution of Sri Lanka (1972) can be considered as an important step in relation to this. Article 18 of the First Republican Constitution of Sri Lanka includes provisions related to Fundamental Rights.

However, this Constitution does not mention provisions for the protection of the Fundamental Rights or measures that can be taken in instances of violating these rights.

The Third Chapter of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (The Second Republican Constitution) contains Fundamental Rights. Article 10 to 14 of the Constitution deal with Fundamental Rights

Fundamental Rights

Article 10

²²Every person is entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.

For free distribution

74

Article 11

²²No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

Article 12

²²All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law.

²²No citizen shall be discriminated on the ground of race, religion, language, caste, sex, political opinion, place of birth or any other of this nature.

Article 13

²²No person shall be arrested arbitrarily. Retrospective penal legislation shall not be implemented.

Article 14

²²Freedom of speech, assembly, association, occupation, movement.

²²Freedom to form and join a trade union.

²²Freedom of choosing his residence within Sri Lanka.

Measures that can be taken when Fundamental Rights are violated

²²As stated in Article 17 and 126 of the 1978 Constitution, a person is entitled to make an application to the Supreme Court regarding the violation or imminent violation of a Fundamental Right over Executive or Administrative action.

²²Complaints about violation of fundamental rights can be forwarded to the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka.

²²A complaint can be made to the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration or Ombudsman regarding a violation of a Fundamental Right by an Administrative Action.

For free distribution

75

Since Sri Lanka has also signed and accepted the First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that we discussed earlier, in a legal case dealing with the violation of human rights, an individual who has exhausted all available domestic remedies should complain to the United Nations Human Rights Committee.

Present situation of the enjoyment of Human Rights in Sri Lanka

The Constitution of Sri Lanka provides opportunity for an individual to seek the interference of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka to redress of a violation or imminent violation of the Fundamental Right guaranteed by the Constitution by Executive or Administrative Action.

The Supreme Court takes action to inquire into and determine the petitions presented to in this manner and deliver fair decisions by providing suitable remedies.

The task of inquiring into and reporting, subjected to the provisions of law, of the Violation of Fundamental Rights by the State officers and officers attached to government affiliated corporations, Local Government and other such institutions is carried out by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration or Ombudsman.

Citizens are given the opportunity of complaining about violation of fundamental rights to the Human Rights Commission. The function of The Human Rights Commission is to inquire into the complaints of violation of Human Rights and suggest appropriate recommendations. This process also guarantees the Fundamental Rights of the citizens of Sri Lanka. Other than these processes there are various strategies operated in Sri Lanka to raise awareness among citizens for the fulfillment of human rights and obligations.

Through the inclusion of sections of the subject of Human Rights in the syllabi of the National Institute of Education, Schools and Colleges of Education the student community is made aware of Human Rights and obligations. These strategies will contribute to build up a future generation who will respect Human Rights and fulfills duties and responsibilities connected with them.

Steps have been taken to raise awareness among student population about Human Rights and obligations through academic courses conducted by

For free distribution

76

the universities and other educational institutions. Furthermore, steps have been taken to raise awareness among officers attached to law, peace and public security and government officers attached to various other spheres by organizing training courses about the upliftment of conditions regarding human rights in Sri Lanka.

In this manner, awareness about human rights and duties by the general public will establish good governance in a democratic society.

Activity 3.9

²²Collect newspaper articles which contain information about Supreme Court determinations on petitions on the incidents of violation of Fundamental Rights.

²²Study those reports well.

Limitations of the enjoyment of Fundamental Rights

The concept of Human Rights is important as a moral concept. On the basis of freedom and equality, laws and other provisions are implemented for the provision of equal enjoyment of Human Rights by all.

At the same time, we are subjected to certain restrictions and limitations when enjoying Human Rights. Nobody can restrict the rights enjoyed by another.

Even though a person can walk along the road by waving his walking stick the freedom should end at the tip of the other person’s nose

Harold Laski

Article 15 of the 1978 Constitution states the limitations of enjoying the Fundamental Rights. Accordingly, the power to impose restrictions on the grounds of national defense, promotion of ethnic and religious harmony, safeguarding the national economy, public health, protection and respect of the rights of others are stated in the Constitution.

As an example of such a situation is that when there are military or civil struggles or violence in the country the government has the authority to control media for the benefit of the public.

For free distribution

77

Role of citizens in safeguarding Human Rights

Evidence can be presented to show the fact that since ancient times it had been a habit of Sri Lankans to fulfill their duties and responsibilities. Looking after the elders by the family members, fulfillment of one’s duties and responsibilities towards them have become a tradition since ancient times. In the same way our ancient cultural heritage witnesses that Sri Lankans have sacrificed their labour, capabilities, and skills for the country.

Even when they enjoy resources found in the environment they paid special attention to perform human activities while protecting the natural environment.

Fulfillment of duties and responsibilities connected with rights is a fundamental feature of a democratic way of living. Fulfillment of one’s duties and responsibilities further safeguards one’s rights as well as the rights of others. Furthermore, fulfillment of duties connected with the rights leads to establish wellbeing of democratic society as well as the qualities like peace, harmony and unity.

Civil responsibilities connected with rights can be classified in the following manner.

Duties

Legal DutiesMoral Duties

Diagram 3.6

The duties that should be performed by a citizen according to the prevailing laws of the country can simply be introduced as legal duties. Payment of taxes imposed by the government, abide by laws, bound to protect the Constitution of the country are some examples of legal duties. Disregard or neglect of legal duties may liable to be punished according to law. Care for the adults; look after them, respect the customs and traditions and upholding of them are examples of moral duties.

For free distribution

78

Treating teachers; respecting and maintaining social customs practices; protecting the environment, national heritages and resources; and protecting the culture are a few examples for moral duties.

Abstaining from dangerous drugs, smoking and malpractices is a moral that is gererally accepted by society. Every individual has a moral right to abstain from such misdeeds and lead an exemplary life. In addition to it safeguarding the society from such activities becomes a moral duty of a citizen with good conduct.

Failure to fulfill moral duties may cause loss of social recognition and respect may be subject to displeasure of the society towards that person. Fulfillment of moral duties properly may directly influence the dignity, respect and social recognition of that person.

Fundemental duties

The constitution of Sri Lanka mentions both fundemental rights and duties. Aritcle 28 of 1978 constitution of Sri Lanka states the fundemental duties. (Pay your attention to the facts you studied about 'Duties of Citizens' in the first chapter of grade 10 Civic Education) ( Page 24,25)

Activity 3.10

²²Column I of the following table presents the basic duties that should be fulfilled by the citizens. Mention in Column II the functions that should be performed by a citizen in order to fulfill these duties.

Column IBasic duties that should be fulfilled by the citizens

Column IIFunctions that should be performed by a citizen in order to fulfill these dutiesImprovement of National Progress and nurturethe unity of the nation--------------------------------------

Improvement of National Progress and nurturethe unity of the nation--------------------------------------

Work with dedication in the occupationselected by oneself according one’s conscience --------------------------------------

Protect nature and natural resources--------------------------------------

For free distribution

79

The role of the citizen in safeguarding Human Rights

Fulfilling the duties as a family member

The social unit that a person gets membership with his birth is the family. We all live as members of a family.

Think of the rights that a person enjoys as a member of a family. Food and nutrition, love and affection, protection and security, education are some examples of the rights entitled to from the family. Parent and elders provide these facilities to you regarding them as duties and responsibilities they have towards you.

In return for the enjoyment of these rights your obligation is to fulfill your duties and responsibilities towards your parents and adults which in turn will safeguard not only your rights but the rights of your parents and adults as well. It is quite important to consider these obligations as moral obligations or duties. Mutual fulfillment of duties and responsibilities towards each other as family members will bring stability and progress of the family. It further establishes and strengthens bonds among the members of the family.

Fulfillment of duties as a member of the family

Other than the family unit the most important institution that contributes to build up a person’s life in a proper manner is the school. Think of the rights that you enjoy as a member of the school.

An important fact that you should pay your attention to is the fact that the government spends a great deal of money for the provision of education to you free of charge. Provision of education to you, improvement of your skills and capabilities, presenting you to the society as a good citizen are some of the services carried out by the school. Pay your attention to the duties and responsibilities that you have towards your school. Engaging in educational activities properly, being obedient to your teachers, being disciplined, respecting and safeguarding rules, regulations and traditions of the school, utilizing resources of the school while protecting them are some examples of the duties that you should fulfill to wards your school.

Enjoyment of the rights that you are entitled to as a student will help you to make your future life successful. While enjoying your rights fulfillment of your

For free distribution

80

duties and responsibilities towards your school may pave the way for you to protect your dignity and respect.

Fulfillment of duties as a member of a higher education institute

When you enter a higher education institution to get higher education, as an educated, intelligent citizen enjoying the rights you should make sure that you fulfill your duties and responsibilities well.

As a student of a higher education institute while enjoying your rights it is very important for you to pay attention to safeguard the rights of others. You should also have the determination to engage in educational activities well and enter the society as a worthy citizen of the country. The time a person spends as a student of a higher education institution should be taken as a very important period of one’s educational life. By acting in that manner the student can bring reputation to the educational institution. In the same way by completing your education effectively you can fulfill the expectations that the country has put on you.

Duties that should be fulfilled while engaging in an occupation

Once you complete your education you will get an opportunity in future to engage in an occupation according to the educational and professional qualifications that you have gained. Whichever occupation you are engaged in, as workers, you should fulfill your duties and responsibilities towards your society as well as to your country by carrying out your work with dignity and efficiently.

Whichever is the occupation it serves the society. Performing the duties related to your occupation honestly and with dedication will bring progress not only to your society but to your country as well. You should determine to serve the persons that expect your service, to their maximum satisfaction. For the service you give them you will get the ability to fulfill the duties in return of the rights you are entitled to enjoy.

The society will appreciate and give due recognition to your occupation by providing maximum service to the society. Determine to give more to the society than what you get from the society.

For free distribution

81

Activity 3.11

²²“As members of the school family we will fulfill our duties while enjoying our rights.” Write a suitable article for the School Wall Paper on the above topic.

For free distribution

82

04

Environmental Problems and

Sustainable Development

According to the information available so far about the planets that exist in the universe, the most unique planet is the earth. Keeping the Sun as its head, its location and the geological and biological evolution has created a living environment. The biosphere consists of an atmosphere which is formed by the amalgamation of atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere and it has created a conducive environment for the plants and animals in the biosphere.

In recent times the concept of environment has attracted the attention of human society as it has been subjected to various changes mainly due to its effect on the human society. Even though, previously, man has maintained interrelationships with environment they did not influence so much because the environment could bear those changes. Therefore, in order to get a proper understanding of the environment it is quite important to understand the real meaning of the environment, its components and its extent.

Interpretations and views on Environment

We are part of the earth and it is part of us.

The perfumed flowers are our sisters.

The bear, the deer, the great eagle, these are our brothers.

The rocky crests, the dew in the meadow, the body heat of

the pony, and man all belong to the same family.

Chief Seattle's Letter - 1854

For free distribution

83

“The Environment is a blend of external states which influence the existence of living beings.”

Garen Johns - Dictionary of Environmental Science – 1990

‘The Environment is the physical, chemical and biological states that exist around a living being.”

- Dictionary of Environment

“The environment of a person is his surroundings. In the same manner the environment of a plant or an animal also consists of the things that can be found around it.

- Man and the Environment -1998

According to this, environment is a mixture of living and non living things. Accordingly all the animals including humans, plants, living and non living things belong to the environment. All of them have complex and diverse inter relationships between each other. The existence and processes occur by their inter relationships.

Activity 4.1

²² Develop a common definition to interpret the environment.

²² Prepare a collection of definitions written on environment.

For free distribution

84

Components which form the environment

Nonliving (Non-biological) Components

This includes atmosphere, hydrosphere, and lithosphere. The atmosphere includes the air on earth, the lithosphere consists of the crust and the outer mantle and the hydrosphere includes the ocean and freshwater. All these components interrelate with plants and other living beings in various ways. Many physical and chemical factors that affect living systems can be seen in these main components. For example, solar radiation, temperature, rainfall, salinity, acidity and bases (PH value), etc.

Living (biological) Components

Living components consist of all the animals including man, plants and micro - organisms. The process that produces food essential for the living components produced using the energy of the sun is known as primary production.

Social Environment

Social environment is a part of non physical environment. Multi ethnic status, religion, castes, heritages, customs, rights, duties, responsibilities, cultures are included in the physical setting of the social environment. This has been developed with the intervention of man.

Environment is the surrounding that we live in. Ancient Greeks refered to the environment as Oikos. They point out that the surroundings that one lives in consist of all the living beings, the interrelationship that exists among them and the physical, chemical and biological operations that contribute to its existence.

Fundamental study of the earth environment reveals that it can be classified as man made environment and social environment. This can be analyzed in another way as physical environment, biological environment and human environment.

Natural Environment

Natural environment is composed of living and non-living components. These things function as natural systems without human influence. It consists of all the plants, animals, rocks, soil, water, air, weather, energy, radiation and electricity as well as natural phenomena that occurs within them.

For free distribution

85

Community that belongs to the natural environment

Fig 4.1-A Forest Fig 4.2- A Mountain Range

Fig 4.3- Animals

Fig 4.4- Plant types

Fig 4.5- Birds

Fig 4.6- A Cross section of soila

Fig 4.7 - A river

Fig 4.8- Sun light

For free distribution

86

Phenomena that occurs in the natural environment

Fig 4.9 - Carbon cycleFig 4.10 - Water cycle

Fig 4.11 - Mineral cycle Fig 4.12 - Food chain

Balanced combination of these environmental systems is important for the existence of not only the human species but also for the existence of the entire world.

The environment and man

Man is a part of nature. Man is an internal part of environment. Man is the main component of the living environment which is formed from the physical environment. Therefore, his existence will be established within the environment itself. Man tends to change the environment using his thinking power and his attempt to put this power into practice in the practical world. The result of this is his temptation to change the nature rapidly and this change caused greater influence

For free distribution

87

on the environmental balance. Wellbeing of nature affects the wellbeing of man. Thus protecting nature is important.

Services obtained from the environment

Life support Services

This includes eternal services like sun light, air, water that we get from the environment. These services are essential for the existence of living beings.

Economic Support Services

This consists of raw materials and energy essential for human existence. Economic support services consist of land, mineral resources, chemical elements, timber, plants and animal foods and drinks, etc., as raw materials where as solar energy, fossil fuel, bio gas, geothermal heat hydroelectricity, wind power as energy Man has made a greater influence on the environment in these sections in order to satisfy his needs.

Waste material absorption services

This is important as a sublime service that we get from the environment. The waste matter collected in the environment through various activities of the animal world and through human economic activities is absorbed by the environment. However, this ability of the environment is lost when the waste matter in the environment gets collected at an intolerable level. Then the environment responds unfavourably. Accordingly, environment is an essential component for human existence and man cannot survive without the environment. Therefore, it is important for man to maintain his economic activities as part of the environment without affecting it.

Man’s attempt to change the environment

In the human civilization ancient man had limited capacity to change the environment. He was capable of changing the environment while living in it so that the environment could forebear such changes. Simplicity of man and modest life style were the primary reasons for this. But modern man has been able to use the knowledge, technical and skill proficiency that he possesses to obtain the resources

For free distribution

88

that he requires and utilizes them for his own benefit. Man has pioneered among other living beings that exist on the earth and he possesses 0.5% of the whole mass of life on earth. Even though this number is comparatively small its effect on earth is great.

With the evolution of the Homo Sapiens, the human environment has been expanding qualitatively and quantitatively into the physical environment and the biological environment causing greater influence on them. At the beginning the influence caused on the environment was quantitatively smaller and hence the natural environment was able to absorb them easily. Therefore it did not influence the balance of the eco system.

By the mid 20th century, population on earth increased greatly. In the same manner the human resource expanded as a result of qualitative development of living conditions. With the change of the environment, natural balance of certain places on earth was subject to change. As a result of this even the balance of the earth, too, was subjected to change. In 2012 the world population reached 7 billion even surpassing the forecast rate of growth. When performing his economic activities man has used natural resources, mineral resources, etc, unlimitedly. Due to this, physical environment is utilized unlimitedly for changes that occur on the natural system of the environment based on the changes that occur in the human environmental systems, specially, colonization agricultural-industrialization, industrialization, urbanization infrastructure facilities and other service requirements. Through the intensification of the changes that take place on the surface of the earth, many grave environmental effects or environmental problems and disasters take place.

Fig 4.13 - An occasion which water has been polluted

For free distribution

89

Environmental Problems

All sorts of destructive conditions make the beautiful earth surface ugly. Its effect can be shown as environmental problems. This is caused by both natural and human activities. Breakdown of the ecological balance caused by this dual action can be considered as environmental problems. Problems created by natural causes affect for a short period of time and stabilizes due to the influence of the biological and physical environmental factors. But changes that take place in the physical environment caused by human action do not stabilize within a short period of time. This has become unbearable.

Environmental problems of the Earth can be identified in terms of environmental problems related to hydrosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere and biosphere.

Social influences that take place due to environmental problems

Many environmental problems are caused by the over utilization of environmental resources in an unorganized manner in order to satisfy human needs. Many countries of the world suffer due to this fact. Food and nutritional problems, diseases and health problems, destruction of life and property due to disasters, social and economic degradation, etc., pose serious threat to the wellbeing of the society.

Over consumption of resources can be noticed as the main cause for environmental problems. Developed countries utilize relatively higher level of resource consumption. As a result of this, developing countries are affected unfavourably and are severly affected by many environmental problems. The main reason for this is the fact that resources of the developing countries are directed towards fulfilling the needs of the developed countries. For example, higher percentage of natural and mineral resources found in African, South American, and Asian continents are used for the requirements of developing countries. Due to this fact the resources are depleted rapidly as they tend to limitless mining and quarrying of resources for selling them. Poverty of these countries have been increased as they do not have a fair price for the resources. Due to their poverty, destruction of forests, unsophisticated mining and quarrying and unprotected use of the resources have intensified these problems.

Accordingly, environmental problems have intensified social disparities further and because of that they have been subject to many environmental and social influences.

For free distribution

90

Activity 4.2

²² Explain natural causes that lead to environmental problems.

²² Show the bad effects of environmental problems caused by natural factors.

²² Write an article to the newspaper on "Social effects created by environmental problems".

Damage caused to the physical environment through natural phenomena

Environmental problems are created by the phenomena that affect the natural balance of the earth sphere. As examples, earth quakes, landslides, volcanoes, wild fire, glaziers, floods, droughts, whirlwinds, tsunami can be taken.

Fig 4.15 - TsunamiFig 4.14 - Earth quake

Through the environmental problems created by these natural incidents short term disasters take place. A storm damages the natural environment as well as property and when the effect of the storm diminishes its effect also ends. Here the affected trees and plants recover or adapt within a very short period of time. But destroyed property has to be reconstructed.

Activity 4.3

²² Prepare an information file on environmental problems created by these natural incidents

For free distribution

91

Environmental problems created by human

As a result of human activities on the natural environmental systems environmental changes occur subsequently creating many grave environmental problems. Bad effects of these changes have given rise to many severe problems such as global warming, severe changes in the weather patterns, pollution of bio diversity, pollution of air and water, loss of soil fertility, occurrence of acid rains, depletion of the ozone layer, desertification, saltification, spreading diseases, melting glaziers and rising sea level. Actually, even though all these are treated as environmental problems they can also be shown as problems of the human species. The causes of environmental problems are discussed below.

Water Pollution

The specific feature of water is that it can dissolve many substances easily. Therefore water gets easily polluted. During the past 125 years due to human activities water was polluted rapidly. Water is polluted as a result of increasing population, improper disposal of human excretion in an unhygienic manner, releasing harmful materials through industrial waste, destruction of forests, agricultural activities, etc., because of this reason 24% of world population have lost the right to protected water.

Clean water

Clean water means water without acidity or alkaline. Ph. value of pure water is 7.0. Pure water cannot be seen in the natural environment because it becomes acidic by contacting with carbon dioxide found in the air.

Water pollution is the change of natural quality of water or else the change in physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water.

Causes of water pollution

²²By industries

As examples paper, paint, garments, tanning leather, mineral oil, rubber, food industry, and iron and steel industry can be identified.

For free distribution

92

²²By agricultural activities

Fertilizer, weedicides, pesticides, insecticides, etc.

²²By natural causes

Volcanic activity, earthquakes, tsunami, landslides, activities of underground mineral materials

²²Becoming impure through household consumption and garbage and sewage

²²Washing vehicles

²²By acid rains

²²Nutrient, algae and aquatic plants

²²Gem mining, quarrying, building construction, laying oil and water, construction of artificial reservoirs, coal mining

²²Salt water inflow

²²Military exercises and nuclear experiments carried out at the sea

Problems created by water pollution

²²Disturb the functioning of the water cycle

²²Spread of diseases and plague caused by drinking polluted water

²²Death of aquatic organisms

²²Interrupt agricultural activities

²²Death of aquatic plants and aquatic community

²²Spread of algae and other hostile plants

²²Destruction of natural beauty

²²High cost borne to obtain pure water

For free distribution

93

Damages caused to the lithosphere and human influences related to them

Many resources essential for human needs are obtained from the lithosphere. Lithosphere is the earth’s outer covering of hard rocks. This consists of rocks, minerals and soil. This part is utilized by man for all sorts of his economic activities. Iron ore, aluminum, titanium, manganese, lead, copper, tin, platinum, uranium, mercury are included in this. Man uses these materials for his industrial requirements. As these minerals are spread unequally they are owned only by few countries.

Fig. 4.18 Mining

Fig. 4.16 Iron ore miningFig 4.17 Coal mining

Since these mineral resources are spread not only on the surface of the earth but it is also found in the interior of the earth it causes much damage to the Lithosphere.

Fig. 4.19 Influences and damages caused by mining

For free distribution

94

These mineral resources are exhaustible resources because it takes a long span of time for the formation of them. Therefore, they should be utilized economically. Mining should be carried out by causing minimum damage to the lithosphere.

Influences of the damage caused to the lithosphere

²²Destruction of natural beauty

²²Degradation of soil

²²Formation of marginal lands

²²Flooding

²²Infertility of soil

²²Destruction of forest cover

²²Spread of infectious diseases

²²Destruction of water resources

²²Reduction of underground water level

Damages caused as a result of the utilization of land and the human influences towards it

Land utilization demonstrates the changes made to the natural land and for the satisfaction of human needs. Changes made by man to the land is shown in the pictures below.

For free distribution

95

Fig. 4.22 - Other activitiesFig. 4.23 - Created environment

Fig. 4.20 - HighwaysFig. 4.21 - Factories

Different threats have been posed to the environmental types of system due to the land utilization

Removal of forest cover in this manner for agricultural activities

Out of the 144.8 million km2 total land area of the earth only 11% can be cultivated. Much of the land area remains unsuitable for human dwelling and for economic activities. Already a large amount of land area is cleared for cultivation. The main reasons for the removal of this forest cover are preparation of agricultural lands, fulfillment of energy requirements, timber trade, colonization, and construction of industries, mining, construction of roads, development projects, and construction of artificial reservoirs. As examples depletion of forest resource : 85% the in Ivory Coast, 68% in Congo Forests, 95% in Bangladesh and 78% in Sri Lanka Forests have been destroyed.

For free distribution

96

Harmful effects caused by the depletion of forests

²²Supply of oxygen to the atmosphere is obstructed

²²Reduce the ability to absorb carbon dioxide

²²Drying up of water reserves

²²Removal of moisture of the soil

²²Increase of floods and landslides

²²Infertility of the soil due to deterioration of the physical qualities of the soil

²²Loss of dwelling for the living beings

²²Decline of the beauty of the environment

²²Limitation of the supply of timber, food and medicines

²²Destruction of bio-diversity

²²Increase of soil erosion

²²Increase of global warming

²²Lowering of the underground water level

²²Desertification

Activity 4.4

²² Prepare an information file depletion of biological resources (living resources) and other related sections.

²² Suggest measures that can be taken to conserve forest resource.

²² Make use of the experiences gained by being sensitive to the environment to develop good values.

²² Present your ideas about the measures you can take as a good citizen to minimize environmental problems.

For free distribution

97

Use of chemicals in agricultural activities

Since Green Revolution with the modernization of agricultural activities which increased the harvest, the use of chemical fertilizer, insecticides, weedicides has given rise to various problems. It changed the local environmental conditions and polluted water. Accordingly, many strategies introduced under Green Revolution have contributed to pollute the environment. By 2010, 40% of the responsibility for global warming rests on these influences. As a result of this 23% of fertile land has been deteriorated. (Source: Management of Environmental Resources and Sustainable Development – H.A. Danapala)

Disposal of indecomposable waste matter on land

With the technological development of man plastics and other artificial materials, electronic goods and instruments are produced with the resources available in the environment by changing their characteristics. They reach the market competitively in different shapes. Within a very short period of time they become outdated and are converted into waste. All these matter cannot be easily decomposed through the natural process. The rate of production of these goods is higher than the rate of destroying them and as a result they are added to the physical environment as excess matter. This has become an obstacle to the environmental process and the outcome of it is the pollution of land, water and air. They are very

difficult to be recycled.

Deposition of industrial waste

In the process of producing goods and services by man industrial waste is disposed as a byproduct of mineral fuel, remains of minerals, iron and noniron remains, etc.

A part of this waste matter can be recycled where as many cannot be recycled. This has created many problems. The highly critical one out of them is the deposition of nuclear waste. Many problems have been created due to the inclusion of radioactive material in them.

For free distribution

98

Fig. 4.24 Industrial waste Fig 4.25 Nuclear waste

Fig 4.26 Chemical waste

Air Pollution

Changes that take place in the composition of atmosphere can be defined as air pollution. Human activities have been the main cause of it. This disaster began as a result of the new inventions of the Industrial Revolution and Green Revolution. Particularly this was started when man began to use fossil fuel as an energy source. Other than this, sectors such as industrial, agricultural, transport and deforestation have contributed to air pollution.

For free distribution

99

Air Pollution and Greenhouse air emission

3%8%

13%

19%

17%

19%

26%

Energy power generation

Industrial Sector

Destruction of forests

Agricultural sector

Transport Sector

Domestic and commercial activitiesWaste matter and liquid waste

Even though 99.9% of the atmosphere is composed of nitrogen, oxygen and argon, rare types of gases such as carbon dioxide, methane, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, and chlorofluorocarbon have contributed to this air pollution. Many of these gases are by products of things produced by man.

Natural causes of air pollution

Fig. 4.27 - Volcanic eruptionFig. 4.28 - Wild fire

For free distribution

100

Fig. 4.29 - Sand storms

Air pollution by human activities

Fig. 4.30 - FactoriesFig. 4.31 - Transport activitiesFig. 4.32 - Garbage

Fig 4.33 - Aero planesFig 4.34 - Deforestation

Harmful effects of air pollution

²²Global warming

²²Depletion of ozone layer

²²Acid rains

²²Sand clouds

²²Destruction of bio-diversity and bio production process

²²Climatic changes

For free distribution

101

²²Melting snow caps

²²Rising sea level

²²Spread of diseases and epidemics

Fig 4.35 - Depletion of ozone layerFig 4.36 - Acid rainsFig 4.37 - Sand storms

Fig 4.38 - FloodsFig 4.40 - Melting snow caps

Fig 4.41 - Diseases

Fig 4.39 - Droughts

Effects of air pollution on climatic conditions

The natural greenhouse cover has been severely changed due to the manmade greenhouse gases produced and released to the atmosphere as a result of modernization that took place in agricultural, industrial and transport sectors. The increasing concentration of greenhouse gases in this manner has caused global warming. From Industrial Revolution, burning of fossil fuel and deforestation has contributed to increase the concentration of hydrogen to 26%. Due to activities like

For free distribution

102

agriculture and animal husbandry, methane concentration have also increased as a result of increased bio mass combustion power.

Bad effects of climatic changes

²²Rising average temperature of the world

²²Changes in precipitation process

²²Marginal occurrences example - lightning storms, tornados, ice rains etc.

²²El Nino effect

²²Effects of monsoon activities

²²Melting snow and ice cover

²²Rising sea level

²²Decreasing agricultural harvest

²²Increasing contageous diseases

Effects on the biological environment and the social environment

Human activities have contributed to remove biological resources from their natural habitats or eliminate them. Through these natural processes, nonliving components have greatly affected plant and animal population. As an example forests, wet lands, bio diversity, oceanic resources including coral reefs have been affected by this. A large number of plants and animal population have been included in the Red Data book due to this reason. Accordingly, while the biological environment directly contributes to the existence of social environment the breakdown of its balance also causes the decline of the social environment.

Effects of damaging the biological environment

²²Collapse of the balance of biological environment

²²Destruction of endemic plants and animal communities

²²Collapse of the functions of the bio systems such as oxygen cycle, carbon cycle, water cycle

For free distribution

103

²²Collapse of food chains and food webs

²²Formation of invasive plants and animals

Effects on the social environment

When human activities become complex even the social environment becomes complicated. Complex activities of man have even caused social diversity. Accordingly, role conflicts, functions related to environmental conflicts, socio cultural and moral decline, collapse of family institutions, role of the family becoming complex, changes in social institutions, globalization, changes in economic patterns, technical modernization, etc., have influenced almost all the societies in the world.

Effects of the damage done to social environment

²²Collapse of social relationships

²²Occurrence of religious and racial/communal conflicts

²²Social injustice takes place

²²Breakdown of family institutions

²²Breakdown of parent children relationships

²²Increase of immorality

²²Increase of anti-social activities

Responsibilities and duties of the government over environment

It is obvious that all the animal and plant species including human living on earth have no existence without the environment. Therefore, it is important to protect the qualitative and quantitative aspects of environment. Government should follow environmental protection and conservation strategies. Measures that could be taken for this are given below.

²²Introducing environment standards, issuing environmental protection license, and carrying out assessment to find environmental impact before commencing large scale development projects according to National Environment Act

²²Protecting the environment by taking regionally important decisions regularly concidering the requirements of the environment.

For free distribution

104

²²Developing the attitudes of the citizens to abide by the legal frame work related to environment

²²Producing environment friendly citizens by introducting awareness raising programmes

²²Esitmating environmental cost when doing development projects

²²Directing the production and industrial sector of the country towards the concept of green productivity

Responsibilities and duties of citizens regarding environment

²²Using environmental resources economically

²²Prevention of disposing indecomposable waste

²²Recycling waste matter

²²Encouraging planting trees around home and its surrounding

²²Work with the awareness of the importance of environment

²²Raise awareness among others about protecting the environment

²²Follow and abide by the environmental laws

²²Assisting the institutions affiliated with the environment

²²Following an environment friendly life style

Development

Qualitative improvements in the living conditions of man can be defined simply as development. At the beginning, the concept of development was considered to be the economic growth and identified it as an increase in the Gross Domestic Product. However, the concept of development gives priority to raise the living conditions of a country, improvement of welfare services and economic progress.

Evolution of the concept of development

As the modern concept of development is a concept originated in the Western World it is very important to pay attention to several definitions put forward by academics in order to get a thorough understanding of it.

For free distribution

105

Development occurs with: the reduction and elimination of poverty, inequality and unemployment within a growing economy.

Dudley Seers-

"Increase in production and the improvement in the methodology and institutional organizations that contributed to increase the production is development."Kindal Burg -

Development is the upliftment of the quality of life of the world population.1961 - 70 development decadeUnited Nations Organization

Economic development of a country should go together with social development.

Social Development should take place in food, nutrition, health, education, housing, social security, clothing, leisure, human freedom etc.

1978 UNESCO Declaration

Development is the process of growth and changes in factors including population, social, cultural and moral aspects.

1981 – 90 Development Decade

The United Nations Organization

Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet

their own needs.

The Brundtland Commission

For free distribution

106

According to the above definitions ,it is clear that the concept of Development at the beginning tended towards economic development but subsequently it favours the qualitative development in life.It further expands in to a broad concept to include changes that take place in traditions, cultures and moral values. Subsequently, it included concepts like human rights, democracy, politics, nature of institutions and quality of the environment.

Activity 4.5

²² Explain the meaning of "Development" based on the definitions given.

²² Analyze the reason for the concept of "Development" to change from time to time.

Measurement of Development

Development should be measured in order to consider the economic progress and level achieved by a country, By measuring, it can be determined whether it remains at a higher or lower level. A number of measurements are used to measure it. These measurements have been changed with time.

SocialEconomicMoral

Find out the solution for the problem

Economic policies are important

Can be compared with other countries

Structural changes to the economy are essential

Identify development disparitiesObjectives of measuring development

Comprehend the problems

Diagram 4.1

For free distribution

107

Activity 4.6

²² Engage in a brain storming disussion about the intention of measuring the development using the above concept map.

Development Measurements

TraditionalModern

Gross Domestic Product

Per Capita Gross Domestic Product

Real Gross National Product

Economic Growth Rate

Physical Quality of Life Index

Human Development Index

Human Poverty Index

Human Pressure Index

Multidimensional Poverty Index

Telephone Density

Internet Usage

Changes in Market Structure

Inclusive Wealth Index

Computer Literacy

Green Gross Domestic Product

Diagram 4.2

For free distribution

108

Gross National Product

The total of the value additions of all the goods and services produced in a country within a year after taking Net Foreign Factor Income into consideration is called Gross National Product.

Gross National Product = Gross Domestic Product + Net Foreign Factor Income

Per Capita Gross National Product

The average amount of the goods and services produced in a country within a year that is held by an adult is called the Per Capita Gross National Product or Per Capita National Income.

Per Capita National Product = Gross National Product

Mid Year Population

Drawbacks in Per Capita Gross National Product

²²Only economic factors are considered

²²It does not display social status

²²Information on social welfare is not included

²²The value of this is divided among persons who do not contribute to production

Real National Product = Nominal Gross National Product x100

Implicit Price Index

For free distribution

109

Modern Measurement

Physical Quality of Life Index ( PQLI )

Three components are used to prepare this index.

Literacy

Life expectancy at birth

Infant Mortality Rate

This index takes values from 0 – 100. This index helps to understand social, cultural, educational, nutritional and health aspects of a country.

By this index the nature of social development can be measured. Therefore, the real nature of the development can be identified through this. This is used as a supplement to the Per Capita Income.

Human Development Index

This is a relative measurement which is used for measuring human development.The progress achieved by a country in social and economic components can be measured using this index. It represents human development as higher, medium and lower levels.

This is a composite index which measures the three aspects of human development, namely, healthy living, level of knowledge and living conditions. Following components were used at the beginning for the preparation of this index.

²²Life expectancy at birth

²²Education

²²Per Capita Income adjusted by the purchasing power

But at present a wider concept of education is used instead of literacy. Using this index countries are categorized as very high, moderate and lower level of human development.

For free distribution

110

HD index of some selected countries

Place HeldHD indexCountry201220102012201092910'7150'658Sri Lanka

1361190'5540'519India

1461250'5150'490Pakistan

64570'7690'744Malaysia

18270'8950'846Singapore

340'9370'902USA

13170'9060'869Iceland

1771580'3590'317Sierra Leone

Source: Human Index Report 2010 and 2013

Efficiency of the measurements used to measure development

Drawbacks in Per Capita Gross National Product

²²Only economic factors are considered

²²It does not display social status

²²Information on social welfare is not included

²²The value of this is divided among persons who do not contribute to production

Classification of countries according to development

Depending on the level of development, using both traditional and modern types of measurements, countries are classified as

²²Developing Countries

²²Developed Countries

For free distribution

111

Features of Developing Countries

Physical Quality Life Index is lowerInfant Mortality Rate is higher

The Rate of Population growth is higher

Number of patients per doctor is higherUsage of technology is lower

Foreign Exchange earnings are lower

Human Development Index is lower

Per - Capita Income is lower

Diagram 4.3

Problems encountered by the developing countries

²²Scarcity of Capital

²² Price variability in primary goods

²²Have to pay higher prices on imports

²²Unfavourable balance of payments

²²Protectionist policies adopted by developed countries in international trade Example: tariffs, rationing systems

²²Energy crisis

²²Brain drain

The reason for the state of poverty prevailing in the developing countries is depicted by the vicious cycle of poverty.

For free distribution

112

low income

less production

higher consumer expense

less capitalreduce savings

Diagram 4.4

Solutions for the problems faced in the process of development

²² Encourage domestic savings

²² Diversification of exports

²² Search for new markets

²² Follow import substitution policies

²² Introduce alternative energy sources and use them

²² Formation of regional organizations

²² Formation of trade agreements with developed countries

²² Obtain foreign aids

For free distribution

113

Diagram 4.5

Political instability

Terrorist problems

Unemployment

Population growth rate

Shortage of foreign exchange

Less technological knowledge

Price fluctuations of primary goods

Rate of dependents at a higher level

Unfavourable balance of payments

Malnutrition

Domestic resources owned by foreignersScarcity of capital

Problems faced by

Developing Countries

Examples of Developing Countries

²² Sierra Leone

²² Ethiopia

²² Somalia

²² India

²² Bangladesh

Significance of Sri Lanka as a Developing Country

²² In relation to the Developing Countries Sri Lanka has a higher level of literacy

²² Infant mortality and maternal mortality remain at a lower level

²² Life Expectancy remains at a higher level

For free distribution

114

Measures that Sri Lanka has taken to overcome development challenges

²² Developing tourism

²² Encourage local knowledge and domestic investors

²² Expand technological knowledge and skills

²² Build up political stability

²² Encourage domestic savings

²² Export diversification

²² Develop infrastructure facilities

²² Promote export oriented industries

²² Convert Sri Lanka into a hub of shipping, education and information technology

Characteristics of Developed Countries

Urban population is higher

Physical Quality of Life is higher

Industrial contribution is higher

Greater amount of capital resources

Expenditureon education ishigher

Infant Mortality Rate is lower

LifeExpectancy ishigher

Moretechnologyis used

Higher level of Literacy

HumanDevelopmentIndex is higher

Per Capita Income is higher

Characteristics of Developing Countries

Diagram 4.6

For free distribution

115

Problems faced by Developed Countries

²² Environmental Pollution

²² International Terrorism

²² Difficulty in obtaining raw materials

²² Energy crisis

²² Market competition

²² Intensifying social problems

²² Increasing natural disasters

²² Market competition posed by Newly Industrialized Countries

Examples of Developed Countries

²² Norway

²² Sweden

²² Japan

²² USA

²² Australia

²² Canada

²² Germany

²² France

²² Belgium

The Concept of Sustainable Development

The greatest challenge in the concept of development is the fulfillment of human necessities which expand with the increase in population. More resources

For free distribution

116

have to be used to fulfill needs of the increasing population. The environment has to bear a huge cost resulted by the increase in production and inputs. The environment is put into great risk due to the fact that in the process of development man has completely forgotten the environment as he pay greater attention to fulfill his needs and requirements.

Due to the reasons like excessive mining of resources, moving to alternative resources as a result of the scarcity of resources, increase of waste matter disposed to the environment, intensification of environmental pollution, etc., we have to face marginal states such as damaging the bio diversity, obstruction of natural process, intensification of natural disasters and increase in global warming.

Even though the concept of development has upgraded the quality of human life through economic development it is revealed that as a whole it has not been able to bring fairness to the world community. Majority of the world population suffers from poverty while destruction and deterioration of the quality of natural resources are taking place. As a result of this, a greater number of people are subject to unfavourable physical health conditions.

In this manner, changes that cannot be borne by the physical environmental systems should not be brought about for the sake of the quality of human development. The interactions between man and the environment should not be disregarded and we should not leave room for the destruction of resources. It is important to pay attention to prevent depletion of rare and exhaustible (non-renewable) resources. We should also utilize these resources with proper management. Accordingly, man should enter into the development concept in a fair manner that safeguards the existence of the future man in the globe despite the development attempts.

Sustainable development is maintaining the process of development in a higher level that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.

For free distribution

117

Evolution of the concept of Sustainable Development

The initiative for the concept of sustainable development was taken with the establishment of the World Environmental Commission in 1983 with the former Prime Minister of Norway Gro Harlem Brundtland as its President. The report by the name “Our Common Future” which was published by this Commission argued that the “Environment and Development” should be integrated. Accordingly, sustainable development is defined as “the development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. It proposed to achieve those goals nationally as well as internationally. This concept has been formally accepted worldwide and the International Conference on Environment and Development held in July 1992 at Riode Janeiro paid more attention to environmental problems. At this conference the agenda for the 21st century was globally accepted. All the nations were expected to carry out strategies endorsed for the Sustainable Development and to fulfill all their tasks and responsibilities.

The United Nations held Millennium Conference in year 2000 and when formulating millennium objectives priority was given to objectives of sustainable development. Progress of the Millennium Objectives of the world was evaluated in 2005. Tewnty years after the first conference, in 2012, a World Conference was held again in Riode Janeiro. It was held “for the renewal of our commitment for a lasting development of our planet and to ensure an economically, socially and environmentally established future for the present and future generations”. Accordingly, it is quite essential not to deviate from the determinations arrived at this conference.

In this manner the United Nations Conference (Rio + 20) determined that it is quite essential to improve lasting development further by uniting all the sectors in its different perspectives including economic, social and environmental sectors and by accepting their interrelationships. Hence, it is admirable that the world community have paid attention to this concept on policy and legal basis.

For free distribution

118

Challenges to overcome when achieving Sustainable Development

Developmentof valuesTechnology

used in

output

Social

participation

Achievement

of fairness

Fulfilment of

basic human

needs

Instinctive needs

Sustainable

development

Environmental

developmentEconomic

development

Environment

friendly

resourcesSafeguarding

aesthetic beauty

Development affordable to the earthPrevention ofSocial Cost

Competition created by the expansion of the Market

Attitudes

towards profit

maximization

Diagram 4.7

Necessity of Sustainable Development

In the fulfillment of human needs and wants under Sustainable Development, irrespeetive of considering only economic needs, attention should be paid to both social and environmental development fulfilling human needs and wants.

In the development process it is quite important to be sensitive to the needs of the environment. The social cost of the damage caused to the environment and the loss of natural resources in the process of human development should be

For free distribution

119

assessed. Since the economic activities which are carried out with the expectation of profit making, affect the entire world population there should be restrictions. It is important to set restrictions on harmful things produced on profit expectation. The balance of social, economic and environmental development should be brought about by carrying out environmental assessments on large scale mining and construction activities, industries and agricultural activities which cause damage to the environment. Therefore, if we are going to have a pure world for our future generation we should utilize resources without exploiting them. The great Indian poet Kalidasa in his text “Kumara Sambhawa” stated that the earth should be utilized in the manner of milking a cow and not by exploitation. Therefore, what is expected by Sustainable Development is the development in that sense. It is, therefore, important to pay attention to the Millennium Goals on Environment and Development.

Measures that should be taken to achieve Sustainable Development

At present many countries in the world have realized the importance of the concept of Sustainable Development. Accordingly, agreements have been reached to guarantee an economically, socially and environmentally Sustainable future not only for our planet but for the future generation as well. Thus it is important to pay attention to Millennium Goals on Sustainable Development.

Main factor that determines development is the availability of resources. It is easier to achieve Sustainable Development by increasing productivity and efficiency of the resources. Here the 3R concept is important as a main approach that can be utilized.

• Reduce • Reuse • Recycle

Strategies gtobally used to increase productivity

5S Concept - Productivity Concept

CP - Cleaner Production Concept

GP - Green Productivity Concept

For free distribution

120

TQM - The Concept of Total Quality Management

Poka Yoke - Mistake Proofing

PPP - Producer Pays Principle

Activity 4.7

²² Propose measures that you can take at home to act in an environmental friendly manner.

²² Out of the proposals you suggested select sections in which you should be more sensitive and put them into practice.

²² Take follow up measures in carrying out these tasks.

²² Take initiative by your class to carry out environmental protection programmes that can be put into practice in your school.

Avoid excessive consumptionEnvironmental friendly life style

Conservation of power and energy

Economical uses of resources

Do not damage the physical environment

Proper disposal of garbage

Adopt laws and regulations

Development of environmental friendly attitudes

Responsibilities of Citizens on Sustainable Development

Diagram 4.8

For free distribution

121

The duty and responsibility of different institutions and organizations about Sustainable Development

The entire economic process of a country is directed and managed by the state or government sector and the private sector. In all these activities it is quite important to pay greater attention to the importance of the environment.Particularly, these institutions should be bound to be sensitive to the damage caused to the environment, monitoring and searching about them, collecting accurate data, informing, and raising awareness of the relevant institutions and sections. Awareness should be raised about the importance of sustainable development through various media. Especially development of environmental friendly attitudes, thinking, behaviour patterns and simple way of living should be established in the education process.

The duty and responsibility of the government about Sustainable Development

The rulers should possess the guidance and dedication necessary for the accomplishment of the concept of Sustainable Development in the State policies and vision. Here it is quite important to adopt a national policy on Sustainable Development. Through this the rulers should be responsible for strengthening state institutions, raising awareness among them and directing them towards Sustainable Development. All these awareness raising activities should be carried out by the officers of state and state institutions. Further, they should be involved in the enforcement of National Environmental Acts through the relevant institutions and mediation in the administration of justice properly. From time to time important policy decisions should be taken considering the environmental needs locally as well as at national level.

Poverty of the people can be regarded as a major reason for the destruction of the environmental resources. As a result of this, environmental resources are misused and exploited in an unauthorized manner. Measures to alleviate poverty must be followed in order to prevent this. Steps should be taken to minimize the imbalance that prevails in production, distribution and consumption of a country. Investors should be encouraged towards environmental friendly production and services.

For free distribution

122

Accordingly, several responsibilities and duties of the government to be fulfilled in order to maintain sustainable development are given below.

²²Planning and implementing environmental conservation programmes.

²²Encouraging manufacturers of environmental friendly goods and services.

²²Educating the public about the importance of consuming environmental friendly goods and services.

²²Making and enforcement of laws related to environmental conservation. example- 1980 National Environment Act.

²²Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)

²²Environmental Protection License (EPL)

²²Introducing environmental standards

²²Declaring Environmental Protection Areas (EPA)

²²Controling the emmission of green house gases

²²Directing people towards environmental friendly life style, limit the excessive consumption of resources.

For free distribution

123

05

International Relations

For free distribution

124

We will now look at some definitions on International Relations.

Definitions on International Relations

I. International Relations mean all types of relations that exist among nations.

II. State level relationships are maintained by officers authorized by the state.

Accordingly, international relations mean the relationship that exist between two or more countries or, if not between states or international organizations or between states and persons. You can easily understand this idea by looking at the following illustration.

State

State

State

Non - StateNon - State

Non - State

PersonPerson

Diagram 5.1

For free distribution

125

Importance of International Relations

Mutual relationships that exist between two or more states or else between states and organizations or if not between states and persons are identified as international relations. These relationships can prevail between states and states and also between states and various organizations, or between states and other organizations or with persons. Let’s now look at the reasons for maintaining relationships of this form.

They are,

1. Obtaining something which the country by itself cannot fulfil.

As stated above, isolation that prevailed among countries disappeared due to factors like the increasing rate of growth of the population and the complexity of human needs. As a result, no country is able to satisfy all their needs by the resources existing in their own countries. Since resources available in countries differed from one country to another goods and services produced by using those resources also differed. Hence, the world community realized the fact that development of internatiional relationship is beneficial for a country to sell its excess production and also to obtain the goods that are scarce in that country.

2. Ability to expand relationships on political, economic, cultural and social grounds.

Almost all the countries in the world, differ more or less on political, economic, cultural and social grounds. There are favourable as well as unfavourable effects of this but international relations are important in order to develop favourable effects further. How does this support favourable effects? As an example, India and Sri Lanka had developed international relations several thousands of years ago.

In the same manner, many countries in the world develop relations based on political, economic, cultural and social factors. The relations that had developed in the past in this way have been developing gradually up to now and we can see that it helped to develop mutual friendships among countries.

For free distribution

126

3. Protection from the influences exerted by powerful countries

Modern countries in the world have become powerful on the basis of factors like economic and military powers. Specially, economically strong and militarily powerful countries put pressure on relatively less powerful countries in various ways. This situation developed after these countries were liberated from Colonialism. Powerful countries put pressure on them politically by means of giving loans and aids, providing weapons and other military assistance in civil wars. Development of international relations of less powerful countries to a certain extent helped to protect themselves from threats posed on them by the powerful countries. If that does not happen less powerful countries may become a victim of powerful countries in the international community.

4. Prevention of obstacles caused by protectionist policies

We can observe now that many countries of the world follow protectionist policies, in their economic activities, for example, purchasing of garment on the basis of quotas, imposition of a guaranteed price through various agreements can be stated.

Activity 5.1

²²Define international relations briefly and explain the importance of it.

Main aspects of maintaining international relations

You know that international relations are the relationships that take place between countries in almost every field such as political, social, and cultural spheres. By now you have also studied the importance of maintaining those relations.

Next, it is important to pay attention to the main aspects of international relations. We can identify two main aspects of maintaining international relations. They are:

1. State strategic relations

2. Military strategic relations

For free distribution

127

1. State strategic relations

Peaceful relationships maintained by countries among themselves can be identified as state strategic relations. Diplomatic relations developed at official levels through ambassadors and state emissaries can be considered as state strategic relations. These state strategic relations are directed by government foreign policy. The foreign policy of a government shows with whom the country should maintain strategic relations and how it should be carried out. Especially strategic state relations are established through international conferences, bilateral meetings of leaders of the states, specially through foreign missions and foreign ministers.

2. Military strategic relations

Relationships build up on defence matters can be considered as military strategic relations. Especially a country builds up military or defence relations with another country or countries when its security is threatened militarily. For example we can show the military bases established during the First and Second World Wars.

Through military strategic relations military training and specialist support, supply of military weapons, use of military forces and humanitarian assistance (like providing medicine) take place. Military strategic relations are important particularly in maintaining balance of power among states. This will reduce tendency of one country or several countries becoming a threat to other countries by expanding military power.

Different spheres in which international relations are developed

Even though international relations prevailed in the past it was confined to a greater extent to a few spheres. Particularly, we can identify that these relations have been generated on the basis of trade and cultural factors. For example, the relations that existed between Sri Lanka and India were based on cultural factors. Relationship between India and Arabia were based on trade. However, we can identify that these relations at present have spread to various other spheres. Accordingly, we can show that diplomatic relations now prevail on the basis of areas like technical relations and educational relations.

For free distribution

128

With the development in the field of science and technology and the revolution that is taking place in the fields of communication and transportation, the world has become a global village. In modern science, specially in the construction of high speed aeroplanes and supersonic jets and also development in road systems international relations have contributed a lot. International relations have been developed very fast as a result of improvement in facilities like reading books and journals through the internet (E-Library). These developments in various fields of technology have made the global village very much closer today.

Fig 5.1 - High-speed AircraftFig 5.2 - High-speed Rail

Factors that contributed to the development of international relations

By now you have realized very well the spheres in which international relations have been developed. Accordingly, it is worth to consider the factors that have influenced the growth of international relations.

²²Resource disparity or the differences in the availability of resources in each country.

Example : fossil fuel is abundant in Middle East countries while it is not available in many other countries in the world.

²²Inability of a country to produce all its needs within the country itself.

Example : Importing wheat flour and sugar by Sri Lanka

One of the main problems a country faces today is its inability to produce all the goods and services necessary for the people of the country within itself. Therefore, since a country always has to depend on another country it has to build up relations internationally.

For free distribution

129

²²Sale of excess production

When the goods and services are produced using resources available abundently in a country they may exceed the requirements of that country. International relations develop when that country sells the excess production to another country for which those goods are scarce.

²²Development in transport and communication

Transportation and communication are too spheres in which rapid developments are taking place at present. As a result, world has become a global village. Specially, due to easy access to travelling facilities and also fast flow of information, international relations have been developing very fast.

²²Necessity of obtaining advanced technological knowledge

Many countries in the world have benefited from the development of science and technology but these developments did not reach other countries in the same speed. As a consequence of this a gap was created between developed countries and less developed countries. In comparison to the development of technology in the developed countries the level of development in less developed countries remains at a minimum level. Due to this fact, there was a scarcity of advanced technological skills in these countries. As a result less developed countries are required to obtain new technological discoveries, instruments, specialist support and knowledge, from developing countries.

²²Obtaining support in emergencies and other disaster situations

A country has to obtain help and support from another country in emergency situations. Tsunami, whirlwinds, tornados, floods, landslides, volcanoes and similar natural disasters are a few exampes of such situations. In such situations countries come forward to provide humanitarian assistance only if they have built up positive international relations.

For free distribution

130

²²Development of political, economic, social and cultural relations

International relations are important in developing various political ideologies, economic policies, social and cultural relationships followed by countries. While friendship among these countries are improved through this they volunteer to provide support services like foreign aids, loans and supply of various equipments essential for social development. Not only motivation necessary to acheive the optimum level politically but guidance is also provided. In certain occasions representation of the country internationally on behalf of certain political rights and ideologies also takes place. This factor has a greater impact on developing international relations.

Present aspect of international relations

It seems that in the past international relations were maintained in order to satisfy a limited number of objectives but now international relations are formed with the intention of achieving various aims and objectives.

In recent times it is possible to identify how the powerful countries influence less powerful countries. It is a significant fact that powerful countries pose pressure not only economically, politically and by military force but also technologically on less powerful countries.

With the fall of Power Base Ideology after the World War II, an environment was created for all the countries to maintain a neutral foreign policy. It can be noticed that powerful countries attempt in various ways to influence the less powerful countries even in such a background. Some such influencing areas are given below.

²²International Trade

²²Offering loans and aids

²²Economic development

²²Defense spheres

²²Provision of employments

Next we will examine how Sri Lanka is influenced by the international community on the above grounds.

For free distribution

131

The influence of international relations on Sri Lanka

When we look at the present status of international relations we can see the aspect that powerful countries put pressure on weaker countries. These influences can be identified under the spheres such as economic, political, military spheres.

Particularly, the influences put on Sri Lanka do not take uniform outlook. The nature of the pressure put on Sri Lanka by the world community changes with the nature of the government in power. However, here the influences caused on Sri Lanka in relation to the following grounds are discussed.

International Trade

As a low price prevails in the world market for the primary goods exported from Sri Lanka its import income remains at a minimum level. As some developed countries purchase some products of Sri Lanka and re-export them we lose a large sum of money that our country should get.

Because of this Sri Lanka has taken steps to get a stable price for the exports by forming various trade agreements with the international community. In the same way, agreements with regard to exporting garments have been signed in order to supply garments to American buyers.

However, since some trade agreements have been abolished during the past period a certain amount of pressure is put on Sri Lanka through the international trade.

Example:- GSP+ concession

Provision of loans and grants

Provision of Loans and aids to Sri Lanka by the donor countries put great pressure on Sri Lanka. As an example, we can show that in issuing loans and aids various conditions are imposed on Sr Lanka by the donor countries. These conditions are imposed not only by the powerful countries but by various international financial institutions as well.

As examples World Bank, International Monetary Fund can be stated. Some such conditions are given below.

For free distribution

132

²²Employment of the loan or aid on the nominated project only

²²A short duration of time is given for interest payment and repayment of the loan.

²²Physical/human resources of the donor country are utilized in the relevant project.

Economic sphere

In handling its economic activities Sri Lanka faces severe problems during certain periods of time. Particularly, the abolishing of the apparel quota system, rising prices of fuel oil are significant among them. In such situations Sri Lanka has to make a greater effort to maintain stability of the economy. Specially obtaining loans and aids, issuing of treasury bonds, raising bank interest rates are some of them. In such situations the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and Government Treasury perform a commendable service.

National Security

A country has to make a great effort to maintain its national security. Specially, during the time of civil war Sri Lanka made a greater effort for its national security. Here advanced technical knowledge and military equipments have to be obtained from developed countries. Maintenance of national security is challenged when weapons are supplied unofficially to terrorist groups; weapons are sold to the country at higher prices and even when those countries avoid giving military specialist knowledge to the country. National security should be established internally as well as externally. Therefore the three military forces and the police should be kept alert.

Provision of employments

Middle East and South Korea enjoy an important place in creating a job market for Sri Lanka. It generates a large sum of foreign exchange for the country and make a great contribution to the economy of Sri Lanka.

However, in obtaining the labourers for the job market some countries pose a greater influence on Sri Lanka by placing restriction on the number of jobs supplied, imposing minimum qualifications for the jobs, imposing conditions

For free distribution

133

on the remittances of their earnings as well as torture and ill treatment on the labourers. Yet many countries have built up the job market under very friendly relationships.

Regional Organizations

When we discuss about international organizations we should pay attention to another sub category of international organizations operating at regional level. These organizations are formed based on geographical regions that can be seen in the world. For example, we can identify several such organizations by studying the world map given below.

Further we can also identify the existence of sub regions within these geographical regions. As an example we can state the existence of South Asian sub geographical region within the Asian geographical region. We can see how regional organizations are established within such sub regions. These organizations are also recognized by the common name as Regional Organizations.

When we pay attention to how regional organizations are formed we see that they have been established on two main objectives. They are,

²²Regional organizations based on military objectives

²²Regional Organizations based on economic cooperation

Next we will discuss about regional organizations established on military objectives.

After the World War II many countries in the world were unified around two main power bases. Those are, power base headed by United States of America and the other is the power base headed by the Soviet Union.

Based on these two power bases regional organizations were formed on military objectives. Accordingly, the first regional military organization established was the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The main reason for the establishment of NATO was to establish the collective security of the West European countries.

Subsequently, Warsaw Treaty Organization was established by the countries headed by Soviet Union for the protection of the East European countries. The

For free distribution

134

main reason for the establishment of Warsaw Treaty Organization was to retaliate any invasions posed by the NATO organization. However, with the fall of the East European Bloc headed by Soviet Union, the Warsaw Treaty Organization, too, was abolished and now only NATO operates.

In recent times, in World Politics, we can see a trend of establishing regional organizations based on economic objectives. Particularly, formation of state organizations based on these objectives was originated in Europe for the first time. The European Economic Community formed in 1957 was the first regional organization established for the purpose of economic cooperation. After that, European Union and Latin American Free Trade Association were formed.

In the Asian Region ASEAN or Association of South East Asian Nations was established in 1967. Asia Paciﬁc Economic Co-operation Forum was established in 1989. South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) was established in 1985 by the South Asian countries on economic and social activities of the region. Next we will study about SAARC organization.

SAARC Organization

The organization which was established by the Countries belonging to South Asian Region is identified as SAARC organization or South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation. This organization was established for the economic cooperation of the countries in the South Asian region. There are 8 countries which belong to the SAARC organization. Given below is the map showing those countries.

²²India

²²Sri Lanka

²²Pakistan

²²Bangladesh

²²Nepal

²²Bhutan

²²Maldives

²²Afghanistan

Fig 5.3 -

For free distribution

135

Except Afghanistan the other countries got the membership at the time of its establishment. Afghanistan which is the latest member of the organization obtained the membership recently.

The leaders of the member countries put their signature to the SAARC Charter on the 08th of December 1985 at Dhaka in Bangladesh. The Charter was signed in Dhaka in Bangladesh in memory of the former Bangladesh leader Ziaur Rahman who was assassinated while he was taking initiatives to establish this organization.

Given below is the official logo of the SAARC organization. It symbolizes the cooperation of the member countries.

Fig 5.4 -

The Figure 5.5 depicts the national flags of the member countries of the SAARC Organization.

Fig 5.5 -

Pakistan

Afghanistan

Sri Lanka

India

Nepal

Bhutan

Maldives

Bangladesh

For free distribution

136

Objectives of the SAARC Organization

²²Promoting the welfare of the people of South Asia and to improve their quality of life.

²²Accelerate economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the region.

²²Provide all individuals the opportunity to live in dignity and to realize their full potential.

²²Promote and strengthen collective self-reliance among the countries of South Asia.

²²Contribute to mutual trust, understanding and appreciation of problems of one another.

²²Promote active collaboration and mutual assistance in the economic, social, cultural, technical and scientific fields.

²²Strengthen cooperation with other developing countries.

²²Strengthen cooperation among themselves in international forums on matters of common interest.

Functions of the SAARC Organization

SAARC Charter states that the Heads of State or Government shall meet once a year or more often as and when considered necessary by the Member States. The highest committee of this organization is the Meeting of Heads of States. Other than that there are the Council of Ministers and the Standing Committee of Foreign Secretaries. The SAARC Secretariat which coordinates and monitors the implementation of SAARC activities was established in Kathmandu.

Fig 5.6 - SAARC Secretariate

For free distribution

137

Present status of the SAARC Organization

When we compare with the other international and regional organizations we cannot see any strong relationships among the member countries of the SAARC Organization. It is quite essential for any country to take measures for the promotion of sectors like agricultural development, exports, cultural activities, sports, health activities, welfare facilities. Main reason for this is that all the SAARC countries are developing countries. In the same manner internal political conflicts and also war situations are common problems faced by many of the member countries. It has become quite essential for the member countries to make extra effort to control the drug menace and terrorist groups.

The member states should take steps to create a free market among the member countries, connect with the modern world through the exchange of technological knowledge, improve tourism, taking steps for the protection of environmental sustainability.

In the same way it is essential to prepare programme of work to minimize natural disasters in order to fulfill the development targets. It is also important to pay attention to prepare a specific economic policy in order to protect from various influences posed by the western countries.

Trade Agreements entered into by SAARC countries

1. SAPTA Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA)

2. South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA)

Fig 5.7 - SAARC Summit

For free distribution

138

1. SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA)

Objectives :

²²Development of Trade in the Region

²²Deployment of resources

²²Implement a preferential trade policy limited to South Asia

²²Provide tariff relief

2. South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA)

Objectives :

²²To create free trade zone among regional countries

²²To strengthen economic cooperation among the SAARC nations

²²To speed up local economic growth of each country

²²To improve production process of regional countries

²²To expand opportunities in the labour market

²²To promote conditions of fair competition and manufacturing high quality end products

Relationships SAARC organization has formed with international and regional organizations

SAARC organization has developed relationships with such regional and international organizations .These relationships will bring the opportunity of getting regional and international cooperation. Given below are some of international and regional organizations which have developed relationships in that manner.

SAARC – U NCTAD

SAARC – UNICEF

SAARC – United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

SAARC – Colombo Plan

For free distribution

139

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or ASEAN

Establishment : 1967

Secretariat : Jakarta in Indonesia

Member States : Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam, Brunei, Myanmar, Laos

Objectives :

²²Implementation of a consolidated economic system in the member states based on cooperation

²²Develop research sector

²² Be united for productivity in agricultural and industrial fields

²²Develop trade activities of the member states and developing opportunities of studying the problems arising in international commercial activities

²²Raise the standard of life of the people

Colombo plan

The cooperative venture for the economic and social advancement of the people of South and Southeast Asia is called as Colombo Plan. It was conceived at the Commonwealth Conference on Foreign Affairs held in Colombo. The initiative was taken under the leadership of J.R. Jayewardene, then Finance Minister and Percy Spender; Delegate from Australia. The Logo of the Colombo Plan is given below.

Fig 5.8 -

For free distribution

140

The organization initiated with the participation of seven commonwealth countries which later increased upto twenty seven countries taking the membership.

The member states of colombo Plan

²²Sri Lanka

²²Saudi Arabia

²²Mongolia

²²New Zealand

²²Laos

²²Myanmar

²²Japan

²²Malaysia

²²Maldives

²²Fiji

²²Republic of Korea

²²Australia

²²Pakistan

²²United States of America

²²Nepal

²²Philippines

²²Singapore

²²Islamic Republic of Iran

²²Papua New Guinea

²²Islamic Republic of

Afghanistan

²²Brunie Darussalam

²²India

²²Vietnam

²²Indonesia

²²Thailand

²²Bhutan

²²Bangladesh

The member states of this organization assist in development projects of the developing countries by providing capital aids. Providing specialist services in the fields of agriculture, communication, energy, education, health services and awarding scholarships for training, supplying instruments essential for research activities are the services carried out by this programme.

In order to bring economic and social development in Sri Lanka this programme has contributed not only by providing machinery, vehicles, train engines, agricultural instruments, fishing implements, educational instruments but also giving knowledge of technical skills, training of specialists, and awarding scholarships.

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation

Establishment :- 1988

For free distribution

141

Head Office :- Dhaka in Bangladesh

Member States :- It constitutes seven Member States: five deriving from South Asia, including Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and two from Southeast Asia, including Myanmar and Thailand.

Objectives :

International Organizations

It is essential for us, as members of the society, to have the help and support of others and their cooperation in order to maintain our day to day activities. In the same manner it is essential for the countries of the world to get help and support as well as cooperation of other countries in their various activities for the fulfillment of their various needs and requirements. As a result of this, several countries get together and reach agreements through the formation of conventions in order to fulfill their requirements and this can be regarded as the origin of international organizations.

There are a large number of international organizations in the world. Through them each and every country gets mutual support and benefits. Specially, the United Nations Organization (United Nations) fulfills a great service to every member country. Here you will get the opportunity of understanding the functions of the United Nations and its affiliated institutions as well as several other regional organizations.

The United Nations (UN)

With the end of the Second World War, the United Nations Organization was established in order to prevent the occurrence of another World War because a large number of human lives were destroyed, a large number of people were disabled and became handicapped. Inestimable amount of property was destroyed in this war. Therefore, the world leaders paid attention to prevent countries going into such a destructive state of another war again. The United States of America, Great Britain and Soviet Russia, and other leading countries of the time took the initiative. As a result of this in 1945, a conference was held in the city of San Francisco in the

Integrated economic cooperation and exchange of technological knowledge among member states.

For free distribution

142

United States of America with the participation of 50 countries in order to establish this international organization. The United Nations Convention was ratified by the countries after signing it on 26th of June 1945.

Objectives of the United Nations

²²To promote world peace and protection

²²To promote better relations among countries

²²To support in conflict resolution in social, economic, humane and cultural problems

²²To protect human rights

²²To function as a coordinating centre for the purpose of fulfilling the above objectives

The structure of the United Nations

UnitedNations

General AssemblySecurity Council

Economic and Social Council

Secretariat

International Court of Justice

Trusteeship Council

The General Assembly

²²The General Assembly consists of all the members of the United Nations

²²Each member is entitled to one vote

²²It holds its meetings once a year. special meetings can be held with the request of the majority.

For free distribution

143

Powers and Functions

²²Present recommendations on any factor relevant to the United Nations Charter.

²²Consider and make recommendations on the general principles of cooperation for maintaining international peace and security, including disarmament;

²²Discuss any question relating to international peace and security and, except where a dispute or situation is currently being discussed by the Security Council, make recommendations on it;

²²Consider reports from the Security Council and other United Nations organs

²²Consider and approve the United Nations budget and establish the financial assessments of Member States;

²²Elect the non-permanent members of the Security Council and the members of other United Nations councils and organs and, on the recommendation of the Security Council, appoint the Secretary-General;

The Security Council

²²Total number of members is 15. Five out of them are permanent members. They are:

- China

- The United States of America

- Britain

- France

- Soviet Russia

²²Ten non-permanent members are elected for a period of two years by the General Assembly

²²Decisions are taken by the agreement of at least 9 members including all the permanent members.

²²Only permanent members hold the power of veto.

For free distribution

144

Powers and Functions

²²Maintenance of international peace and security.

²²Investigate into any dispute which may lead to an international conflict.

²²Present recommendations or resolve those disputes.

²²Take steps against any invader of a country.

²²Implement plans to control arms.

Economic and Social Council

There are 54 members. Each country remains in office for a period of three years. 18 members are removed every three years and 18 new members are elected in place of them.

Powers and Functions

²²Promoting respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all.

²²Taking internationally important economic and social subject matters in to discussion.

²²It may call, in accordance with the rules prescribed by the United Nations, international conferences.

²²May enter into agreements with specialized agencies.

²²It may consult non govrnmental organizations on matters falling within its competence.

The Trusteeship Council

²²Trusteeship Council consists of those Members administering trust territories, such Members who are not administering trust territories; and other Members elected by the General Assembly.

For free distribution

145

Powers and Functions

²²Monitoring the administration of the areas that come under the Trusteeship Council.

²²Provision of welfare to the people living in areas under Trusteeship Council

²²Train the people to achieve self determination or independence.

²²Initially there were 11 areas under the Trusteeship Council. Now all these countries have become independent states.

The International Court of Justice

²²It is the main judicial institution of the United Nations

²²All the member countries can submit their complaints to the International Court of Justice

²²The Security Council has power to submit certain legal issues to the International Court of Justice

²²It consists of 15 judges appointed by the General Assembly and the Security Council

²²Only states can appear in the International Court of Justice

Powers and Functions

²²Providing legal advice to the United Nations and its affiliated institutions

²²Inquiring into the complaints submitted by the member countries

²²If the member countries appear for the trials they are bound to accept the determinations delivered by the International Court of Justice

The Secretariat

²²It is the main administrative organ of the United Nations.

²²The chief administrative officer of the Organization is the Secretary-General

For free distribution

146

Powers and Functions

²²Prepare and present the Annual Report of the Organization

²²Controlling the United Nations Peace Forces.

²²Mediate as a Peace Missionary in dispute or conflict resolution.

²²Calling international conferences relevant to the subject matter of the United Nations.

²²Maintenance of Colonization services

Institutions affiliated to the United Nations

There are several institutions affiliated to the United Nations Economic and Social Council which function to carry out the task of protecting human rights through economic and social development. Some of these institutions are given below.

²²Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

²²International Labour Organization (ILO)

²²United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

²²United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)

²²The Secretary-General is appointed by the General Assembly for a period of five years. The maximum number of terms that he can hold the position is two.

²²The Secretary-General may bring to the attention of the Security Council any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security.

²²The staff is appointed by the Secretary-General.

²²In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff do not seek or receive instructions from any government or from any other authority external to the organization.

²²The staff enjoy all the privileges enjoyed by the diplomatic service.

For free distribution

147

²²United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization(UNESCO)

²²International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)

²²International Monetary Fund (IMF)

²²United Nations Population Fund or United Nations Fund for Population Activities(UNFPA)

²²World Food Programme (WFP)

²²World Health Organization (WHO)

²²United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)

Details about selected affiliated institutions

LogoObjectivesAffiliated Institution

Development of aspects such as education, health, natural sciences, humanities, cultural and communication of the member countries

Bring peace through international intelligence

United Nations Eductional, Scientific and Cultural Organization(UNESCO)

Established in 1945

Promotion and consolidation of Rights of the Children

Achievement of complete child development

Work collaboratively with the governments of countries, other institutions of the United Nations and non-governmental organizations for the child development

United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF)

Established in 11th

December 1946

Support in accelerating economic and social development of Developing countries

Provide technical support for Developing countries according to their national development plans and priorities

Establishment of self reliance and earth development

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

Established in 1965

For free distribution

148

LogoObjectivesAffiliated Institution

Provide international protection for refugees

Find durable solutions to the problems faced by refugees

Consolidating the Refugees in their habitual society and help them to lead their normal way of living again

United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)

Established in 14th

December 1950

Give support to developing countries in problems related to the subject of Population

Provide aids to the population programmes in Developing countries

Take measures to promote living conditions of the people in Developing Countries

United Nations Population Fund or United Nations Fund for Population Activities(UNFPA)

Established in 1969

Alleviation of hunger and poverty

Establishment of economic and social development in Developing Countries

Give help and support to persons affected by disasters

World Food Programme (WFP)

Established in 1963

Promotion of social justice for the labour population

Implement international policies and programmes that help to improve service conditions of the labourers and their living conditions

International Labour Organization (ILO)

Established in 1919(it became an affiliated institution of the United Nations in 1946)

For free distribution

149

LogoObjectivesAffiliated Institution

Promote nutritional level and living conditions of the rural community

Intervene in improving agricultural productivity

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

Established in 1945

Attainment by all people of the highest possible level of health

Promoting good physical and mental health conditions without any illness

World Health Organization (WHO)

Established in 1948

Supporting social and economic development of the People of the member countries of the bank in order to have better living conditions help developing countries reduce poverty, promote economic growth, and build prosperity. (the objective at the beginning was to carry out reconstruction development work in member countries destroyed by World War II)

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)

Established in 1949

Maintaining financial stability and formal system of foreign exchange internationally

Formation of a multi-party payment system

Expansion of international trade and promote provision of facilities.

International Monetary Fund (IMF)

Established in 1944

The Commonwealth

Many British Colonies achieved independence during the latter part of the Second World War. With the reception of independence, British Commonwealth was formed in order to maintain relations with those countries further. At the beginning, as countries in the Asian and African region took membership, the

For free distribution

150

word “British” was dropped and was identified by the name “Commonwealth”. In 1911 Great Britain held a Conference called Empire Conference to discuss the common problems faced by countries which belong to its Empire. Subsequently, in 1944 the Common Wealth was established with the membership of countries which were former colonies of the British Empire.

However, the Durham Commission Report of 1839 influenced the birth of the Common Wealth. It is not necessary for all the former colonies which obtained independence to get the membership of the Commonwealth. The leader of the Common Wealth is the King or Queen of Britain.

Initial Members – 07

Initial Member Countries – Great Britain / Australia / South Africa / Zimbabwe / Canada / New Zealand / India

Objectives :

²²Take action to uphold the international peace and stability which facilitate for the protection and progress of the humankind

²²Take steps to develop personal freedom and equal rights of all citizens irrespective of religion, nationality and class.

²²Protection and promotion of the right that all persons have to engage in democratic political activities in order to organize the society that one lives in.

²²Improve the measures taken to eradicate poverty, illiteracy and diseases, and take action to uplift the living conditions of the people.

²²Improve the security among the nations of the state by developing international corporation for the removal of the causes that lead to war situations, instilling patience and doing away with unfairness.

²²Develop human dignity and social equality while denouncing racialism and colonialism

For free distribution

151

Media of international relations

Countries of the world maintain relations in various ways. Specially, through peaceful relationships as well as warfare relationships international relations are built up.

International community performing within peaceful relations is highly favourable. Then it develops mutual trust and corporation and it leads to minimize conflicts.

Next we will consider several main media through which international relations are maintained.

1. Diplomatic Service

The main media through which international relations are maintained peacefully is Diplomatic service. The role played by the diplomatic service in developing international relations is great. While maintaining the foreign policy strongly international objectives are fulfilled through the diplomatic service.

A country may build up official relationships with another country and also with organizations and persons through the diplomatic service. Here the state carries out its foreign policies through diplomats and state missions or emissaries.

The ambassadors of countries that belong to the Commonwealth is called as the High Commissioner. For example, the Indian Embassy in Sri Lanka is identified as the Indian High Commission in Sri Lanka.

The functions of the Ambassadors and the Emissaries

²²Implement the foreign policy of the country

²²Safeguard the expectations of the citizens of his country

²²Deliver the messages of one’s own country to other countries

²²Understand the policies of one’s own country

²²Create a good image about one’s own country

²²Improve friendship among countries

For free distribution

152

²²Develop political, social, economic and intellectual relationships

²²Represent one’s own country and the leader of one’s own country

The qualities of the Ambassadors and the Emissaries

²²Act with proper understanding of one’s profession, rules and regulations, strategies and ethics.

²²Have proper understanding about one’s own country as well as the country that one serves in and the nature of the world politics.

²²Knowledge about state strategies, Arbitration, Conciliation and Negotiation.

²²Utilize international rules and regulations and international political trends for the benefit of one’s own country.

2. International Trade

We have discussed that no country in the world can produce all the things that country needs within that country itself. As a result import and export activities take place among countries.

For example, Sri Lanka exports tea while the United States of America exports wheat flour.

International Trade takes place in two ways.

1.Bilateral Trade

2.Multilateral Trade

Bilateral Trade means the transactions take place between two countries only. As an example, Sri Lanka exports rubber to China while China exports rice to Sri Lanka. When carrying out bilateral trade the two countries have to come to agreements between them.

Multilateral Trade

The trade that takes place among more than two countries is called Multilateral Trade. The specific feature that can be seen in Multilateral Trade is, the value of the

For free distribution

153

goods imported from one country to another can be settled with the value of the goods exported to that country. Assume that Sri Lanka imports milk powder from New Zealand and exports garments to USA.

Sri Lanka New Zealand

Sri Lanka USA Export

Milk Powder

Import

Garments

In the above transaction the amount that should be paid to New Zealand for the import of milk powder can be instructed to be paid with the income from the USA for the Garments exported to that country. In that situation New Zealand can import another good or service from the USA for that value.

Powerful Currencies used in international Trade

- American Dollars

- Sterling Pound

- Euro

- Japan Yen

International Organizations associated with International Trade

- The European Free Trade Association

- UNCTAD Organization

- GATT Organization

- International Monetary Fund

Activity 5.2

²²Select two international organizations associated with internatinal trade and arrange the information under the headings such as membership, objectives, etc.

For free distribution

154

War

War can be considered as a another way that international relations are maintained. This is not a peaceful media of maintaining international relations. A conflicting situation that arises between two or more parties can simply be identified as war. (This has been greatly discussed in Chapter V of Grade 10 Citizenship Education Text Book). The best example for war situation between countries can be stated as the two World Wars. Armed struggle that prevailed in Sri Lanka can be stated as a civil war which took place within a country.

Due to war, international relations are threatened. Refugees are a result of wars. International relations can be damaged due to people migrating from one country to another as refugees. However, some countries voluntarily allow refugees to enter their territories.

It is also necessary to obtain donations and aid for the restoration of property and other resources destroyed by war. If this does not happen countries affected by war would become helpless.

Strengthening of international relations is essential in order to establish and maintain national security. It is quite indispensible for countries which are subjected to internal and external risks of war to seek International Cooperation for their national security.

Foreign Aid

Existence of strong international relations is essential for the provision of foreign aid. Aid is given by the developed countries as well as those countries which are in a position to provide aid. As an example, the assistance provided by India for the Northern Region railway line development projects can be stated.

Foreign aid is given to developing countries for the improvement of areas such as large scale heavy industries, development of infrastructure facilities, welfare services and other economic sections.

For free distribution

155

Fig 5.9 -Reservoirs of Mahaveli Development project

Fig 5.10 -Daduru Oya Development project

There are several ways of providing foreign aid to a country. They are represented in the following graph:

Foreign Aid

DonationsLoansGoods and services

MonetaryNon-MonetaryServices Loans with interestLoans without interestLong term loansShort term loans

Fig 5.11 -Nothern railway and development of highways

For free distribution

156

Given below are countries which provide foreign aid.

- The United States of America

- England

- Japan

- India

Given below are organizations which provide foreign aid.

- - World Bank

- Asian Development Bank

- International Monetary Fund

Activity 5.3

²²Select three countries and three organizations which provide foreign aid. List separately how each of these countries and organizations performed their services to Sri Lanka.

Peace

Prevalence of peace in a country brings happiness to all. Peace is essential not only for the protection of human rights but also for the progress of economic, social, cultural, political aspects of a country. All the citizens should work with responsibility for the maintenance of peace in the country. Peace can be developed if we work without being divided on any narrow communal, religious basis or any other grounds. Such a situation does not give way to conflict. The United Nations which was formed for the purpose of creating world peace renders a great service for the protection of peace.

Development

When peace is established in a country development takes place automatically. A country which does not experience peace have to spend a large amount of money to maintain the armed forces of the country, to purchase weapons,

For free distribution

157

to look after refugees, persons dying at war or the disabled and to reconstruct the destroyed property. Since a large amount of the National Income is spent on the areas mentioned above, the amount of money that is allocated for other development work takes a minimum value. As a result of this, the development of the country is hampered by it or will completely break down.

Therefore, a country in which peace prevails, the money spent on war can be utilized to achieve development targets. Then economic and social development accelerates. New job opportunities are generated. Purchasing power of the people increases. A quality living condition is created. It generates new investment opportunities and the entire economy becomes strong.

Effects of building up international relations

Following benefits can be achieved by building up international relations.

²²Develops international friendship. Due to this all the states follow a friendship policy. Give help and support in emergency situations.

²²New job opportunities are created.

²²Mutual help is given in emergency situations.

²²New technological knowledge can be exchanged.

²²Support will be given on development activities.