==== BLOCKS ==== 

11For Free Distribution

2

The main objective of this chapter is to study the geographical and

social identity of Sri Lanka.

Identity of Sri Lanka

Any individual in the society has his or her own identity based on the features of his or her body and character. Accordingly, an individual can be separated and identified within a group. Similarly a country too has a specific identity.

Fig. 2.1 - The Geographical identity of Sri Lanka

For Free Distribution12

The Geographical Identity

We can clearly understand the geographical identity of Sri Lanka when studying figure 2.1. A. As shown in map 2.1 A, Sri Lanka is located near the equator in the tropical zone, between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. Accordingly, Sri Lanka is located within the east longitudes in the Northern Hemisphere. Sri Lanka is separated from India by a narrow strip of sea known as the Palk Strait.

Map 2.1 B - Relative location of Sri Lanka

The island of Sri Lanka is located in the Indian Ocean closer to the Indian sub continent. Showing the location of a country based on lands and oceans in its immediate surroundings is called relative location.

Observe the map 2.1 B and

Map 2.1 A- The location of Sri Lanka

13For Free Distribution

Fig. 2.1 C - Specific location of Sri Lanka

Source- global.Britannica.com 20015/03/13

identify the relative location of Sri Lanka. The other islands located in the Indian Ocean other than Sri Lanka are Maldives, Andaman Islands, Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep Islands.

Activity

Fill in the blanks

1. The location of the continent of………….. is to the North of

Sri Lanka, the ………….ocean is to the south ,the countries of……………………..to the east and the continent of ………………..lies to the west.

2. On a blank map of Sri Lanka, mark and name three islands located

to the Northwestern part of Sri Lanka.

3. Write three benefits Sri Lanka gains due to its location in the Indian

Ocean.

Showing the location of a country with reference to longitudes and latitudes is called the specific location. Figure 2.1 C indicates the specific location of Sri Lanka. Accordingly, it is clear that Sri Lanka is located between 5055'- 9051' North Latitudes and 79041'- 81053' East Longitudes.

For Free Distribution14

Map 2.1 E - Sea limit zones of Sri Lanka

Map 2.1D - The area of Sri LankaSource global Britannica com2015/03/13

Activity

Observe the map 2.1 D indicating the area of Sri Lanka and fill in the blanks.

When considering the area of Sri Lanka, the length from Point Pedro to Dondra head is………. the width from ………….to Sagamankanda is ...................

The total area of Sri Lanka is 65610km2

15For Free Distribution

Sri Lanka has an identical boundary and a territorial sea limit. All the coastal states were granted the ownership of a limit of 12 nautical miles from the coast according to the International Convention of the Sea which came into effect from 16th November 1994.This is known as the territorial sea limit. The Exclusive Economic Zone and the adjoining sea area are located beyond the territorial sea limit. This is shown by the map 2.1 E.

Although Sri Lanka is a small island, it has distinct relief features. The three main relief zones in Sri Lanka are the mountainous area located in the centre of the country, the intermediate plains and the coastal plain. These relief zones consist of complex relief features which are different from each other.

Table 2.1 - Topographical Features

Central hillsIntermediate plain Coastal plain

Mountain rangesPlainsBroad plains

PlateausRidgesBays

ValleysResidual hillsLagoons

WaterfallsPoints

Gaps/passesIslands

The geographical identity of Sri Lanka is further emphasized by the scenic beauty and the different relief systems as well as by the favourable climatic conditions. The relief and the diversity of climate attract tourists to this country.The map 2.1 F indicates the main relief zones of Sri Lanka.

For Free Distribution16

Map 2.1 F - Relief zones of Sri Lanka

Activities

1. i. Mark and name the three main relief zones of Sri Lanka on an

outline map.

ii. Refer to an Atlas and mark and name two main mountain ranges, two plateaus and two waterfalls in the map you have drawn.

iii. Mark and name three residual hills located in the intermediate plain, and also mark Colombo, Point Pedro, Dondra Head, Trincomalee and Batticaloa which are located in the costal plain.

2. Name three relief features that depict the natural beauty of the island.

17For Free Distribution

Convectional rain

Southwest monsoon rainNortheast monsoon rain

Cyclones

²²May²²June²²July

Western and Southwestern Parts of Sri Lanka receive heavy rain.

²²March²²April²²September²²October

-- Rain with thunder.- Occurs throughout the year.- Becomes subdued once monsoon gathers strength.

²²October²²November

²²December

-- Rain with strong wind.- Cyclone occur due to the air disturbances in the Bay of Bengal.

²²November²²December²²January

Northern and Eastern parts of Sri Lanka receive heavy rain.

The periodical winds blowing into the country from the directions of Southwest and Northeast are called monsoons.

Sri Lanka is a country located in the tropical zone. Therefore, Sri Lanka has a higher temperature of about 27C0 - 30C0. It has no winter. Sri Lanka receives a uniform rainfall throughout the year. The rain comes in three ways.

²² Monsoon Rain ²² Convectional Rain²² Cyclones

For Free Distribution18

Normally a dry weather condition prevails in Sri Lanka during the months of February and August. Farmers reap their paddy during this period.

Tall trees are grown in the forests which are distributed in wet areas due to the uniform heavy rainfall and the temperature that prevails throughout the year. Grasslands and patanas can be seen close to the plateaus and short trees grow there due to the changes in rainfall, temperature as well as the altitude. Thorny bushes and shrubs grow in the dry and semi-arid areas where a dry climate exists. Mangroves are spread close to coastal lagoons and river mouths.

A tourist traveling to the interior of the country from a coastal area of Sri Lanka can see the variation of relief, climate and the vegetation cover and experience the beauty of this country within a distance of 70km.

2.2 Fig. - Nature of the plants grown in diffrent regions in Sri Lanka

Tall trees in Wet

Zone

Grasslands

Thorny bushes and shrubs

Mangroves

ActivityFill in the blanks.Sri Lanka is a country located in the ……………… zone. Therefore, it has a higher temperature of about ………. . Recieving rain throughout the year through different methods such as ..................., .................. and ................. too is a specialty here. Due to changes of rainfall, ........................ and ……………. there is a variation in plants grown in different areas.

Montane Forest Trees with less height

19For Free Distribution

2.3 Fig. - Social Identity in Sri Lanka

Social Community

Social community of Sri Lanka consists of different ethnic groups like Sinhalese, Tamils, Moors and Burghers and different people who follow various religions such as Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam and Christianity. Therefore, Sri Lanka is considered a multi-racial, multi-religious and multi cultural country. The communities have their identity according to their inherited traditions, customs, beliefs, rituals, clothes and languages.

Social Identity

For Free Distribution20

Intangible heritages

Religious Centres

²²Sri Maha Bodhi

²²Madu church²²Sacred city of Kataragama²²Mosques²²Nallur kovil

²² Sigiriya²² Ranmasu

Uyana

²² Jaffna Fort²² Tanks and

irrigation works

²²Hospitality²²Respecting and treating elders²²Compliments²²Customs and manners.

Other creations

Natural

Cannot be seen

physically but revealed through human behaviour

Man made

National Heritages (Cultural Heritages)

²²Namal Uyana²²Hikkaduwa coast²²Hot water springs²² Waterfalls

Tangible heritages

In spite of different ethnic groups and religions that we are divided

into, all the people who live in this country are Sri Lankans.

National Heritages (Cultural Heritages)

There are various cultural heritages as well as cultural features in Sri Lanka in its multi-ethnic and multi religious society. Cultural features too depict the identity of a country.

Cultural heritages can be categorized in the following manner.

21For Free Distribution

Since ancient times, Sri Lankans have been famous for their

hospitality among the other nations in both East and West.

Map2.2 - Cultural (national) heritages of Sri Lanka

Map 2.2 indicates the various cultural heritages of Sri Lanka

For Free Distribution22

World Heritages

Some national heritages in Sri Lanka have been accepted as world heritages due to their uniqueness. Thus Sri Lanka has gained a global identity. Sri Lanka has the attraction of the foreign tourists and has become a tourist hub and a destination among the eastern countries.These world heritages can be categorized as man- made and natural heritages.

Indigenous people

²² The indigenous people living in various parts of Sri Lanka are

also a special feature when the social identity of Sri Lanka is considered. Those people who live in the areas of Mahiyangana, Dambana and Henannigala spend their lives protecting their inherited language, customs, clothing, cultural features and tools. They earn their livelihood mainly by crop cultivation adapted to the environment, hunting and collecting the forest products.

²² Some indigenous people were settled in Hennanigala area under

Mahaweli dry zone development programme. At present, they have joined the formal education system and are adapted to the modern society, stepping into the higher educational avenues using modern electronic equipments. However, their contribution towards the protection of the ancient cultural heritages and environment conservation should be admired.

23For Free Distribution

Map 2.3 - South Asian Region

Cultural features and festivals

There is an identity in various festivals and cultural features inherited from different tribal groups, various races and religions in the Sri Lankan society. Several cultural festivals and cultural features with such identity are mentioned below.

Wesak/Poson festivalSinhala and Tamil New YearMadu festivalDeepavali festivalRamazan festivalDalada Perahera in KandyChristmas

Activity

1. Write five for each of the man-made and natural things among

tangible heritages in Sri Lanka.

2. Prepare a picture enclosing internationally accepted world heritage

sites located in Sri Lanka and display it in the class room.

3. Prepare a book including various pictures of national and religious

festivals.

Social Development

Sri Lanka is a country that belongs to the South Asian region. Sri Lanka is identified as a country with higher social development among the other countries in this region.

For Free Distribution24

The literacy rate in Sri Lanka is 92%. It is second only to

Maldives among the other South Asian countries.

The levels of the social development of countries have been identified using various units of measurement and criteria. Table 2.1 indicates some data which can be used to compare social development in several fields of the countries in the South Asian region.

Social developmentdata

country

Pakistan

Bangladesh

Nepal

Sri

Lanka

Bhutan

Maldives

India

Table 2.1 Data on social development of the South Asian countries

Life expectancy (years)2012

65.865.769.269.175.167.677.

Literacy15 years and over (2010)

(2006)

63

(2009)

54.5

56.7560.6592Not available

(2006)

98

Birth rate To 1000 (2010)

22.227.320.324.117.620.416'8

Infant mortality rate to 1000 (2010)

48703841144414

Maternalmortalityrate for 1000 live births (2010)

2002602401703518060

Sri Lanka

25For Free Distribution

Although Sri Lanka is a developing country, it has acquired a higher level in the field of social development. Following are some factors contributed towards this achivement.

²² Increase in life expectancy.²² Decrease in infant

mortality rate.

²² Decrease in maternal

mortality rate.

²² Increase of energy to resist

diseases.²² Increase in physical and mental wellbeing.

²² Increase in life expectancy.

²² Development of the literacy

level.²² Increase of living standards.²² Emergence in better

employment opportunities.²² Motivation to spend a

healthy life.²² Acquiring good attitudes.

Ability to obtain a nutritious

meal

Development of educational

facilities

Development of the facilities in the field of medicine and

health

Not only the above factors, but provision of education and health free of charge and the state welfare policies affect the higher level of social development in Sri Lanka

For Free Distribution26

Activities1. Cut and divide the countries that belong to the South Asian region

from a map with political divisions. Paste those pieces on a paper correctly and shade them in various colours.2. Refer to that map and write three sentences about the location of

Sri Lanka

3. According to the table 2.1, name two countries which have a

higher level of literacy rate.

4. Mention three factors affected to the higher level of literacy in

Sri Lanka.

5. Write three benefits that can be acquired to a country due to the

existence of higher level of literacy.

6. Observe table 2.1 and mention the country which has a higher

level of life expectancy. Write two factors that brought about the effect.

Assignment1. I.With your teacher’s instructions, organise an educational trip to

cover the main relief zones in Sri Lanka.

II. Write an essay about the relief features, variations of climate

and the environment you observed during the trip.

III. Evaluate the natural beauty that affected the geographical

identity of Sri Lanka on the basis of the experiences gained.

2. Identify the methods of reciving rain in your area, duration and the

specific features. Write five sentencs about them.

3. Under your teacher’s instructions, collect information and prepare a

file about the cultural features and the cultural heritage sites which are specific to your area.

4. Design a brochure to make people aware as to how literacy and life

expectancy could be improved. Make arrangements to distribute it.

27For Free Distribution

Glossary

²² Identity - wkkH;dj - Pø»aö\õØPÒ

²² Geographical identity - N+f.da,Sh wkkH;dj - uÛzxÁ®

²²Social identity - iudchSh wkkH;dj - §÷PõÍ uÛzxÁ®

²² Ocean Strait - iuqø ikaêh - }›øn

²² Relative location - idfmalaI msysàu - \õº¦ Aø©Âh®

²² Specific location - ksrfmalaI msysàu - uÛ Aø©Âh®

²² Nautical miles - kdúl ie;mqï -PhÀ ø©À

²² Exclusive Economic Zone - wkkH wd¾Ól l,dmh - uÛzxÁ ö£õ¸Íõuõµ Á»¯®

²²Territorial sea limit - rdIaà%h uqyqÿ iSudj - Bh¦» PhÀ GÀø»

²²Natural beauty - iajdNdúl fi!kao¾h - C¯ØøP AÇS

²²Climatic diversity - foaY.=‚l úúO;ajh - õ»{ø»¨£ÀÁøPø©

²²Tourist attraction - ixpdrl wdl¾IKh - _ØÓ»õU PÁºa]

²²Intermediate plain - wNHka;r ;eks;,dj - EÒÍP \©öÁÎPÒ

²²Winter - YS; iD;=j - ©øÇÃÌa]

²²Rainfall - j¾Idm;kh - £¸ÁUPõØÖ ©øÇ

²²Monsoon rain - fudaiï j¾Idj - EøP¨¦©øÇ

²²Convectional rain - ixjyk j¾Idj - ÁÎ

²²Cyclones - jdiq<s j¾Idj - GßÖ® £_

ø©¯õÚ PõkPÒ

²²Air disturbances - jdhq le,öu - ChÄ¯µ®

²²Evergreen forests - iÞyß; jkdka;r -ÁÓÒÁ»¯®

²²Altitude - WÉp;ajh - \‰P uÛzxÁ®

²² Arid areas - Y=Ial m%foaY - £À¼Ú[PÒ

For Free Distribution28

²²Multi-racial - nyq jd¾.sl - £À\©¯[PÒ

²²Multi-religious - nyq wd.ñl - P»õ\õµ ©µ¦›ø©

²²Cultural heritages - ixialD;sl Wreu -öuõmkn¸®

©µ¦›ø©

²²Tangible heritages - iamDYH Wreu - öuõmknµ•i¯õu

©µ¦›ø©

²²World heritages - f,dal Wreu - _ØÖ»õ ø©¯®

²²Intangible heritages - wiamDYH Wreu - v¸¨¤h¨

²²Tourist hub - ixpdrl flakaøh - BvÁõ] ©UPÒ

²²Destination - .ukdka;h - öuß B]¯ Á»¯¨

²²Indigenous people - wdÈjdiS ck;dj - B²Ò Gvº£õº¨¦

²²South Asian Region - ol=Kq wdishdkq l,dmh - GÊzuÔÄ

²²Life expectancy - wdhq wfmalaIdj - ¤Ó¨¦ Ãu®

²²Literacy - idlaIr;dj - uõ´©õº ©µn Ãu®

²²Birth rate - Wm;a wkqmd;slh - ¤Ó¨¦ ÂQu®

²²Infant mortality rate - <ore urK wkqmd;slh - ]_ ©μn ÂQu®²²Maternal mortality rate - ud;D urK wkqmd;slh - ¤μÁ\ ©μn ÂQu®

²²Live births - iÔù Wm;a - E°º ¤Ó¨¦UPÒ

References

²² Socio Economic Data Of Sri Lanka 2014

²² global.britannica.com/EB checked/topic/561906/Sri-Lanka

²² www.wikipedia.lk