Civic Education

Grade 8

Educational Publications Department

iiFor free distribution

First Print 2016Second Print 2017Third Print 2018Fourth Print 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978 - 955 - 25 - 0138 - 8

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Printcare Universal (Pvt) Ltd.No.77, Nungamugoda Road, Kelaniya.

For free distributioniii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

ivFor free distribution

J¸ uõ´ ©UPÒ |õ©õ÷Áõ®Jß÷Ó |õ® ÁõÊ® CÀ»®|ß÷Ó Eh¼À Kk®Jß÷Ó |® S¸v {Ó®

AuÚõÀ \÷Põuµº |õ©õ÷Áõ®JßÓõ´ ÁõÊ® ÁÍ¸® |õ® |ßÓõ´ CÆ CÀ¼Û÷»|»÷© ÁõÌuÀ ÷Ásk©ß÷Óõ

¯õÁ¸® Aß¦ P¸øn²hßJØÖø© ]ÓUP ÁõÌ¢vkuÀö£õßÝ® ©o²® •zx©À» & Ax÷Á¯õßÖ ©È¯õa ö\ÀÁ©ß÷Óõ.

BÚ¢u \©µU÷Põß PÂøu°ß ö£¯º¨¦.

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

For free distributionv

Being innovative, changing with right knowledgeBe a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam Minister of Education

viFor free distribution

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you about 91 textbooks from grades 6-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications Department,Isurupaya,Battaramulla.2019.04.10

For free distributionvii

Monitoring and SupervisionW. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications DepartmentDirectionW.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner of Educational Publications (Development) Educational Publications DepartmentCo-ordination Dakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications DepartmentDarshi Ranasingha Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Board of EditorsProfessor Jayadewa Uyangoda Professor, National Policy Department, University of ColomboDhamma Dissanayaka Senior Lecturer, Department of Political Science and Public Policy, University of ColomboWasantha Senavirathna Head, Department of Public and International Law, Faculty of Law, University of Colombo A.L.S. Abeywickrama Senior Lecturer, National Institute of EducationR.M.D. Rohan Lecturer, National College of Education, Pasdunrata, Kaluthara J.A.P.S. Jayaweera Teacher Service, Kuli/ St. Joseph's College, KuliyapitiyaS. Karunakaran Lecturer, National Institute of Education, MaharagamaRanjith Iluppitiya Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications DepartmentDarshi Ranasingha Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications DepartmentDakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications Department

Boards of Writers

Dr. W.M. Shaminda Wanasinha Lecturer, Open University of Sri Lanka, NawalaM.K. Kingsley Priyantha Lecturer, Ruhuna National College of Education, WalahanduwaH.H. Aruna Indrasena In-Service-Adviser, Zonal Education Office, BalangodaC.S. Jayasinghe Centre Manager (Retired), Teacher Centre, HoranaK.A. Nilantha Pushpakumara Principal, WP/Ho/ Vidyartha Kanishta Vidyalaya, MahagamaW.H. Namal Renuka Teacher Service, Ehaliyagoda Central CollegeA.M.S.B. Alahakoon Teacher Service, Dharmaraja College, KandyD.M. Jayalath Bandara Teacher Service, Saranath Maha Vidyalaya, Kuliyapitiya

viiiFor free distribution

G.G.R.N. Somaweera Teacher Service, Girls' High School, KandyM.F. Mohommad Riyas Lecturer, National College of Education, Dharga NagarU.L. Shiferdeen Marikkar In-Service-Adviser, Zonel Education Office, WattegamaM.H.M. Uvais Teacher service Al-sasha Maha Vidyalaya, Wattegedara, Polgolla

Language EditingProfessor Nimal Mallawaarachchi Department of Sinhala University of Kelaniya, KelaniyaT.D.P. Jayamanna Lecturer, Department of English, Open University of Sri Lanka, Nawala

Cover PageMithila Udara IT Unit, Educational Publications Department

Proof Reading M.A.M. Damayanthi Development Assistant, Secondary School Development Branch, Ministry of Education

Technical Assistance P.A.D. Nisansala Sandamali IT Unit, Educational Publications Department Thinoli shenesha Kothalawala IT Unit, Educational Publications Department

For free distributionix

01 Public Services

02 Democratic Society

03 Multicultural Society

04 Contemporary Issues

05 Let’s Overcome Challenges by Solving Problems

06 Let us enter the world of work

Index

1-31

32-50

51-68

69-103

104-116

117-139

xFor free distribution

For free distribution1

01Public Services

Introduction

The objective of providing public services is to generate qualitative development in the living conditions of the general public. Public services are provided both by the government and the private sector. By studying this chapter you will be able to:

²Identify what public services are

²Identify the manner in which these services contribute to the well being of the general public

²Examine the institutions that provide public services and the responsibilities of those institutions.

²Develop the competencies on fulfilling the obligations that you have in making use of the public services.

Let us identify what public services are

We make use of various services in order to get our daily needs fulfilled. Think of the services that you make use of as a member of your family and as a member of your school.

Public services are the services supplied by the private sector and the government which can be utilized by all the people in common with the objective of developing living conditions of the people.

2For free distribution

Public services that we make use of

Water supplyHealth Education

Transport

Security servicesCommunication

Electricity

Postal Service

Co-operatives

For free distribution3

Public services can be classified based on the way how they are provided to the general public

Public Services

Free servicesPublic services supplied on the basis of charging concessionary rates

Public services supplied by charging money

Public services play an important role in the modern society. Government provides a number of public services free of charge. Certain services are provided at concessionary rates. Government spends a large sum of money in order to maintain these services. Taxes collected by the government and the other income of the government are used in providing these services.

Necessity of public services

²To make daily activities of the people more convenient

²To make living conditions of the people better

²To supply the services which people cannot obtain individually (e.g. electricity, public transport)

²To provide relief to low income earners

²To maintain inter-personal and inter-social relationships

²To facilitate economic activities like the production of goods, distribution and marketing

²To protect human rights through the fulfillment of social needs

²To ensure social justice

4For free distribution

Activity

List the public services utilized by you.

² Name two free services out of those services provided to you by the government.

²Explain how those services help you to make your life better.

Evolution of public services

In the past, from the time of Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa kingdoms, the rulers had sponsored to build tanks, irrigation systems, hospitals, herbal gardens etc. for the benefit of the public.

A tank

It is stated that during the reign of King Buddhadasa in Anuradhapura era (340-368 AD) a physician had been appointed for each group of ten villages. Kings had taken steps to build hospitals and maintain them along with herbal gardens.

Evidence is found to prove that there had been religious-place-based educational institutes from the Anuradhapura era.

Ruins of an ancient hospital

During the British Rule (1815 – 1948 AD) several services had been initiated with the aim of providing facilities necessary for plantation, agriculture and for the convenience of administration and defense.

For free distribution5

Public services started during the British period

A train with a steam engine

²Transport

²Postal and Telecommunication Services

²Banking Services

With the passing of the Education Act in 1945, free education prevailed as a public service. Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara is honoured for introducing free education to Sri Lanka.

Mr. C.W.W. Kannangara

After obtaining Independence in 1948, all the successive governments have taken steps to initiate and maintain several public services.

Activity

◦Prepare a collection of articles relevant to public services that prevailed in the past including the following:

²Public services in the past

²Rulers who sponsored those services

6For free distribution

Timely importance of public services

A communication tower

Provision of services is an important requirement, currently, in upgrading the living conditions of the people. As a welfare state, government carries out several public services in order to fulfil its function. Government provides these services without expecting any profit in return. Private sector supplies these services on the basis of charging money.

Complexity of wants and the increase in population have resulted in an increase in the necessity of public services further.

Public services are also important in providing relief for the people who cannot afford them. Eg - Free education, Health Services etc.

A communication satellite

Many services have developed fast due to the industrial and technological development. Services like communication can be taken as an example for this. A large amount of expenditure has to be borne in order to provide these facilities. These services are essential for the people.

Common features of public services

²Ability to utilize in common without any dissimilarity

²Intention to maintain public welfare rather than earning profits

²Improving the qualitative development of people’s living conditions

²Easily obtainable for the low income earners

²Contribution to the social development through individual development

²Supporting to fulfil basic needs.

²Functioning a system of rules and regulations to safeguard and maintain public services.

For free distribution7

Activity

²List separately the difficulties you would face if you happen to obtain electricity and transport facilities individually.

Public Services in Our Area

Water supply

Water is a resource essential for all living beings. It is also a limited resource. Even though 70% of the surface of the earth is covered with water, only less than 1% of that quantity can be utilized as drinking water. Sri Lanka is an island situated in the Indian Ocean. Although it has many rivers, streams and inland reservoirs, only a limited quantity of such water can be used for drinking. Therefore, the government has to provide water for drinking, as well as for other purposes.

Reasons for the requirement of supply of water as a public service

²Water resource is not sufficiently available in common to satisfy the requirements of all the regions of the island.

²Due to various reasons, underground water and water in the rivers are polluted.

e.g.- Use of agrochemicals, chemical fertilizers and waste matter released to water sources by factories

²Density of population in the urban areas

²With the increase of population, land has to be divided into small plots causing difficulty in digging wells for clean water.

²Facing scarcity of water in various parts of the country during the periods of droughts.

National Water Supply and Drainage Board supplies drinking water to many parts of the country. It supplies water to consumers at concessionary rates. Water Supply and Drainage Board strives hard to make water suitable for human consumption. Water is supplied to industries, gardens, etc too.

Considering the needs of the particular area in their territory, some local bodies too supply drinking water.

8For free distribution

A group of workers repairing a water supply system

The regional offices of the Water Supply and Drainage Board fulfil the functions of supplying water, repairing and maintenance.

Staff of the regional offices of the Water Supply and Drainage Board consists of

²Regional Engineer

²Officer-in-Charge

²Meter Readers

²Plumbers

²Labourers, etc.

Activity

²Explain briefly the factors that lead drinkable water supply to become a timely requirement.

Health service

Carrying out an operation on a patient

The health service of Sri Lanka contributes to build up a healthy nation. Prevention of diseases and curing of illnesses are the basic functions fulfilled by the health service. Since the health service is an essential service, the government has provided facilities for the supply of health service free of charge.

A doctor treating a patient

At present, Sri Lanka has been able to bring the infant mortality rate and the maternal mortality rate to a lower level. The life expectancy also has been brought up to a higher level. It has been able to control diseases such as leprosy, polio, filariasis and tuberculosis to a large extent.

For free distribution9

Recently, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared that Sri Lanka is one of the countries that was able to eradicate malaria completely.

Given below are some reasons for the achievement of such good conditions:

A medical clinic

²Provision of free health services by the government

²Progress achieved by the health service of Sri Lanka

²Availability of health facilities Island-wide

²Public co-operation

Functions fulfilled by the health service

²Treating patients

²Implementing programmes to prevent and control diseases

²Implementation of immunization programmes

²Conducting medical clinics

²Conducting maternity clinics

²Carrying out experiments to diagnose diseases

²Implementing health education programmes

²Launching medical and dental clinics for school children

²Implementation of family health service programmes for mothers and infants

²Carrying out emergency services

Medical systems such as western (allopathy), indigenous, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy are practised throughout the island.

10For free distribution

Hospitals established to treat patients under western medical system

²National hospitals

²Teaching hospitals

²Provincial hospitals

²District hospitals

²Base hospitals

²Regional hospitals

²Specific hospitals

²Primary health treatment institutions

Services implemented by the health service under the western medical system for the prevention of diseases

²Anti-Filariasis Campaign

²Anti-Leprosy Campaign of Sri Lanka

²Anti-Malaria Campaign of Sri Lanka

²Epidemiology Unit

²Family Health Bureau

²Health Education Bureau

²National Cancer Prevention and Control Campaign

²National Dengue Control Unit

²National Programme for the Control of Tuberculosis and Chest Diseases

²The National STD/AIDS Control Programme (STD - Sexually Transmitted Diseases)

²The Non-communicable Diseases Control Centre, etc

For preventing non-communicable diseases, primary health facility centres (814 Suwadivi Centres - by 2015) have been established and are functioning.

Offices of the Medical Officers of Health (MOH) are established covering all the areas of the country in order to provide health services.

Some examples of the services provided by the office of the Medical Officer of Health in your area are given below:

²Implementation of programmes to prevent infectious diseases

²Implementation of programmes to prevent and control non-communicable diseases

²Implementation of health education programmes

²Conducting infant and maternal health clinics

²Immunization

²Implementation of school health programmes

For free distribution11

Health services are provided to your area by the indigenous hospitals and clinics too. These institutions provide treatments to cure diseases. Government has provided facilities to supply these services free of charge. At present, indigenous medical system is becoming popular among foreigners too.

Institutions maintained by the indigenous medical system

²Ayurvedic Teaching Hospital

²Ayurvedic Research Hospitals

²Ayurvedic Hospitals maintained by the Provincial Councils

²Ayurvedic Central Dispensaries maintained by the Provincial Councils

²Free Ayurvedic Dispensaries maintained by the local government bodies.

In addition, traditional indigenous medical practitioners do a great service to the public through their treatments. Private sector also contributes to provide health facilities on the basis of charging money.

The health service of Sri Lanka has achieved a great improvement. However, non-communicable diseases such as heart diseases, diabetes, kidney diseases and cancers are increasing rapidly at present. Many people fall sick due to smoking and drug addiction.

Actions to be taken by the public in order to prevent these diseases;

²Following medical advice

²Following good health habits

²Consumption of healthy food and drinks

²Engaging in exercises adequately

²Refraining from smoking and intoxicants

12For free distribution

Activity

²Name the staff of the hospital and the office of the Medical Officer of Health (MOH) according to their designations.

²List separately the services rendered by the hospital and the office of the Medical Officer of Health in preventing infectious and non-communicable diseases in your area.

Education

Students studying in a primary class

The most valuable resource of a country is the human resource. Education is important as the main factor that influences the advancement and the well-being of the human resource. The right to education is recognized as a human right as well as a right of the child.

Several steps taken by the government to ensure the right to education are given below:

University education

²Providing education free of charge from primary education to higher education.

²Education has been made compulsory for the children up to 16 years of age.

²Allocating a large sum of money for education from the annual budget.

²Free distribution of school textbooks and uniforms.

Piriven education

²Providing a wholesome meal for school children identified as needy with nutritions.

²Taking steps to develop nearly 7000 schools, to enhance the concept that “the nearest school is the best”.

For free distribution13

Private schools, higher education institutes and vocational training institutions are run by the private sector too.

A practical session of vocational education

Early childhood development centres are conducted for pre-school children by the

²local bodies

²voluntary organizations

²religious institutions and the private sector.

Draw your attention to the descriptions given by the following persons regarding their education and employment.

I am a music teacher. From my childhood, I loved to sing songs and recite poems. However, it is my teachers who improved my skills.

I entered the university after passing my A.L.s from the village school. I was able to obtain a degree in music. Free education helped me to achieve this status.

I teach children very happily and enthusiastically.

I am a Chief Inspector of Police. I joined the Police as a Sub Inspector of Police after passing my A.L.s from the village school.

I was a clever sportsman at school. I succeeded in several provincial sports competitions. My school, my teachers and free education helped me to improve those skills.

I consider it as my bounden duty to serve my motherland devotedly.

I serve as a doctor in the hospital in our village. From my childhood, it had been my dream to become a doctor.

I received my primary education from my village school. I entered the central school after passing the Grade 5 Scholarship examination. I entered the medical faculty after passing A.L.s well. I received bursary also. Free education fulfilled my expectations. My determination is to serve my motherland to repay for this. I respect my teachers with great regard.

14For free distribution

Functions of education ²Providing latest knowledge ²Socialization ²Producing good citizens ²Foster national unity ²Producing citizens in conformity with the national requirements ²Producing citizens who can contribute effectively in the World of Work and the field of economy ²Developing competencies in fulfilling responsibilities while enjoying rights connected to them

Your school is the main institution that provides education as a public service in your area. You got the opportunity of studying the staff of the school and its organizational structure in Grade 6 under Civic Education.

Divisional Education Office and the Zonal Education Office are the closest institutions which support to maintain school activities properly and provide facilities for the schools in your area.

Divisional Education Office consists of the Divisional Director of Education and his staff.

Zonal Education Office consists of the staff including the Zonal Director of Education, Deputy Directors, and Assistant Directors for subjects.

Benefits you gainMembership OrganizationLiterary AssociationReligious AssociationDebating TeamBoard of PrefectsSports ClubCadet PlatoonSchool Band

Activity

²Note down the benefits that you can gain by working as an active member of the following organizations in school. (Copy down the table)

²Collect information about some scholars who served /are serving the country through their properly gained.

For free distribution15

Transport

Maheshwari describes to her best friend a trip in which she took part in the vacation.

I proposed my father to go to Colombo by train during the vacation. But Aiya suggested that we should hire a vehicle. Father questioned why we should spend much money when there are so many buses and trains available and suggested to go by train. Travelling by train is quite interesting, not tiresome and the journey is also very quick. We stayed three days in Colombo. We went round to see all the places including the zoo, the planetarium, the harbour and the museum. We travelled by bus in Colombo. Not only SLTB buses, but the private bus service was also very good. We returned to Jaffna also by train. Mother said that since we travelled by trains and buses our expenditure too was quite less.

Public transport systems contribute to fulfil the transport requirements of the people of a country. Transport services are essential for economic activities like production of goods, distribution and marketing.

Majority of the people in our country use public transport systems to fulfil their transport needs.

A private bus

Sri Lanka Transport Board bus

A train

Public transport services are useful for requirements such as,

²Travelling to School

²Private travel and transport

²Travelling for employment

²For travels and tours (e.g. excursions)

Traffic congestions exist in urban areas including the capital city. It has also become a timely requirement to use public transport system in order to reduce traffic congestion. Instead of using private vehicles, the use of public transport system saves money.

Institutions that provide passenger transport services

²Department of Railways, Sri Lanka

²Sri Lanka Transport Board

²Private Bus Transport Service

16For free distribution

Sri Lanka Railway Service and the private sector supply services for transport of goods.

Sri Lanka Transport Board and Sri Lanka Railway supply services for daily travellers like employees and school students with season ticket system on concessionary rates.

S.L.T.B. emblem

Emblem of Sri Lankan Railway

Special services of Sri Lanka Transport Board

A ‘‘Sisu Sariya’’ bus

²Sisu Sariya (for school children)

²Gami Sariya (for the convenience of transport in rural areas)

Private sector too contributes to facilitate the transport of students.

Sri Lanka Transport Board and the Private Bus Service have introduced latest model luxury buses to run on express ways. They have also taken steps to maintain intercity express bus services. Sri Lanka Railway Service too maintains intercity express railway services.

Given below are the staff of a Depot of Sri Lanka Transport Board that contributes to supply services:

²Depot Manager ²Assistant Depot Managers ²Depot Inspectors ²Foremen ²Technicians ²Drivers ²Conductors

²Labourers

For free distribution17

Steps taken by the government to make the public transport service efficient:

A luxury bus running on an express way

²Maintenance and repairing of roads

²Construction of express ways

²Addition of new buses to run on roads

²Addition of new railway compartments and engines to the system

²Providing incentives to the private bus services to improve their service

²Establishment of legal protection for passengers

Activity

²List the benefits you would gain by using public transport services.

²Name the working staff (titles/designations) of a railway station.

²Suggest your proposals to improve the public transport services in your area.

Electricity

A frequent breakdown of power supply occurred for two days due to a sudden technical defect of a power house. A media institution consulted various persons to collect information regarding the difficulties they encountered as a result of this.

I could not do the homework yesterday. I could not iron my school uniforms either. Mother prepares food every day. Since we did not have electricity yesterday, she failed to do even that. We also could not watch television. Students could not use computer lab in the school. We faced a lot of inconveniences.

Ice cream, fish, meat and many other products had to be discarded. They got spoiled. On the other days, people come to buy things in the evening. But yesterday, only a few number of consumers came. We suffered great losses.

Our production was disrupted. Yesterday, two shifts failed. However, we should appreciate the officers for their attempt taken to complete the repair work today itself.

A s chool student

A bus inessman

A manager of a garment factory

-

-

-

18For free distribution

Electricity for hospitals

Due to industrial and technological development, human needs are becoming more and more complex. Electricity has become an essential service for the existing society. Electricity had been supplied to 98.5% of the household units of Sri Lanka by 2015. (Central Bank Annual Report - 2015) The target of the government is to supply electricity for all the houses in Sri Lanka, soon in future.

Electricity is essential to perform the following functions:

Electricity for houses

² To light the houses and for house hold work ²For health services ²For industrial needs ²For necessities of trade institutions ²To light the streets

²To carry out various other services including communication

Electricity for streets

Ceylon Electricity Board supplies electricity to most parts of the country. Lanka Electricity Company (Private) Limited too contributes to supply electricity. Regional offices of Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB) consist of the following working staff.

² Regional Electrical Engineer

² Assistant Electrical Engineer

² Electrical Superintendent

Electricity for industry

²Foremen

² Clerical Staff

² Electricians

² Linesmen

² Field Officers

² Meter Readers

² Drivers

For free distribution19

Activity

²State the services rendered by the regional office in your area related to the supply of electricity. ²Maintain the disadvantages that might occur to the economy of the country when a breakdown of power supply takes place.

Communication services

With the improvement of technology, communication services have been able to achieve a rapid development.

Communication services have become essential today due to following reasons:

A c ommunication tower

²Expansion of social relationships

²Expansion of international relationships

²Complexity of human needs

²Busy schedules

Functions performed by the communication services:

²Transmitting essential messages very quickly

²Developing inter-personal relationships

²Making the administrative activities of the country convenient

²Providing services to maintain relationships among regions

²Providing services to maintain international relationships

²Making business activities convenient

²Supporting tourism

Postal Service

Postal service is provided to the public by the government post offices and the agency post offices. Government maintains post offices in order to provide services to all the areas of the country.

20For free distribution

Examples for some of the services provided by the postal service to the people are as follows:

²Selling stamps

²Distribution of letters and parcels

²Telemail facilities

²Telephone facilities

²Sending money through money orders

²Payment of pensions and public support payments provided by the government

Sri Lanka Telecom and several other private institutions engage in providing telephone facilities to the people. At present, mobile telephone services are also used in abundance.

Communication centres established by the private sector are commonly used for the purpose of communication and telemail.

Activity

²Name the staff members with their job designations of the post office in your area.

Communication services

In a country where a democratic system of government prevails, citizens enjoy the right to information and to express one’s ideas. Mass communication contributes to fulfil this function.

The following are examples of important mass media that operate as public services. Both the State and private sector supply these services.

²Newspapers, magazines and books

²Radio

²Television

²Telephone

²Internet

For free distribution21

Given below are some examples showing the functions fulfilled by the media:

²Making people aware of the important incidents that take place daily.

²Presenting programmes for pleasure and enjoyment

²Improving knowledge on various fields

²Directing public opinion and complaints to the relevant authorities

²Contributing to public welfare through revealing information

²By making people aware of the unfavourable conditions (such as unfavourable weather conditions etc.) that may affect them and prevent causing destruction to life and property

Activity

²Make a list of benefits that can be gained as a student through media.

Security Services

Sri Lanka Police

The fundamental task of police is providing public security and protecting law and order. Police stations are established covering almost all the areas of Sri Lanka, in order to provide services to the people.

Services rendered by Sri Lanka police

A Police officer controlling traffic

An inquiry of an accident

²Protection of peace and security ²Providing public security ²Carrying out preliminary investigations on crimes ²Bringing crime - bound - suspects to law ²Road safety and traffic control activities ²Protection of public property ²Suppressing illegal alcohol, drugs and other rackets ²Providing services in disaster situations and accidents

22For free distribution

For the enquiry of complaints of children and women, a separate section has been established in every police station. Police also helps protect environmental health and curb diseases like Dengue. The staff of a police station consists of the following officers:

² Officer-in-Charge (OIC)

² Inspector of Police (IP)

² Sub Inspectors of Police (SI)

² Police Sergeants

² Police Constables (PC)

² Women Police Constables (WPC)

Sri Lanka Army, Sri Lanka Navy, Sri Lanka Air Force and the Civil Security Force also perform a major role in providing security to the public. Examples for services rendered by the security forces are;

Army salutation in a State ceremony

Providing military service in a disastrous situation

² Protecting the country from war situations

²Suppressing internal and external riots and terrorist activities

²Conducting military honours to welcome diplomats

²Establishing national security

²Conducting military honours on the Independence ceremony and other national festivals

²Helping Police to protect public property as well as human and physical resources

²Providing essential services in situations like general strikes

²Providing relief services to people in emergency and disastrous situations

Activity

²Find and write down the telephone numbers that can be used to inform the Police in case of an emergency.

Official logo of Sri Lanka Police

For free distribution23

Co-operatives

The co-operative movement plays an active role in fulfilling various needs of the public.

The motto of co-operatives is “One for All and All for One”.

Services rendered by the co-operatives:

²Sale of consumer items at concessionary rates.

²Providing credit facilities

²Providing transport facilities

²Providing banking services

²Providing funeral services

²Purchasing and selling of agro products

²Providing insurance services

²Providing hospital services

Co-operatives contribute to provide services to fulfil various needs of our lives. Given below are the different types of co-operative societies operating in Sri Lanka:

²Multi-Purpose Co-operative Societies

²Co-operative Credit Societies

²Agro Producers’ Co-operative Societies (e.g. related to products like tea, rubber and coconut)

²Industrial Co-operative Societies (e.g. related to products like coir, garment, textile)

²Hospital Co-operative Societies

²Transport Co-operative Societies

²School Co-operative Societies

²Housing Co-operative Societies

Activity

²Name the benefits that can be gained by establishing a School Co-operative Society. ²Prepare a list of services rendered by the Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society in your area.

Logo of Co-operative

24For free distribution

Other public services provided by the government

Conservation of the environment

Sinharaja rain forest

St. Claire’s falls

Beach conservation

Man is a member of the environment. Man who protects the environment is protected by the environment. As long as the natural existence of the environment is ensured, the right to live in an unpolluted environment is also established. Many human activities have caused environmental pollution to a greater extent and it has become a threat to the existence of all living beings. Hence, a greater attention is paid on environmental conservation at present. Some institutions established by the government to conserve the environment are given below:

²Ministry of Environment ²Central Environmental Authority ²Department of Wild Life Conservation ²Department of Wild Life ²Geological Survey and Mines Bureau ²Marine Environmental Protection Authority ²Coast Conservation Department Other than these, there are several other voluntary organizations providing services to protect the environment.

Social security network programmes

Social security network programmes are carried out both by the government and some voluntary organizations in order to fulfil the basic needs of man and to empower those who suffer from economic difficulties. Following are some examples for such programmes that are carried out by the government.

²Welfare programmes for senior citizens

²Establishment and maintenance of Elders’ Homes

²Programmes to provide houses for low income earners e.g. ‘Udagama’ Programme, ‘Samata Sewana’ (Shelter for All) Programme

For free distribution25

Activity

²Collect information about the organizations providing various welfare services in your area.

Duties and responsibilities associated with the institutions providing public services

All public services contribute to fulfil the requirements of the people. Proper fulfillment of duties and responsibilities of the staff of the institutions, providing public services, will bring social welfare and proper maintenance of the quality of those services. Let’s consider the duties and responsibilities that should be fulfilled by the institutions providing public services.

Duties and responsibilities that should be fulfilled by the institution

Institutions that provide the servicePublic Service

²Supplying pure drinking water

²Providing services continuously

²Controlling of wastage of water

²Carrying out maintenance work properly

²Meeting the increasing demand for water

²Responding to public complaints appropriately and immediately

²Informing the consumers in advance about temporary stoppage of water supply

e.g.

National Water Supply and Drainage Board

Water supply

²Providing services continuously

²Carrying out proper maintenance

²Guarantee of safety

²Restoring the supply of electricity immediately if a breakdown occurs

²Taking measures to fulfil the increasing demand for electricity

²Responding to public complaints properly and immediately

e.g.

Ceylon Electricity Board

Electricity

26For free distribution

²Treating patients properly

²Supplying suitable medicine for use

²Taking actions to prevent infectious diseases and non-communicable diseases

²Providing necessary facilities and looking after patients

²Providing services continuously

²Taking measures for the mental and physical health of patients

²Providing medical advice and raising awareness

e.g.

Hospitals

Private hospitals

Health service

²Providing education properly

²Developing competencies

²Socialization

²Creating useful citizens for the society

²Creating citizens to suit national requirements

e.g.

Schools

Universities

Vocational training institutes

Education

²Efficient supply of services

²Guarantee of passenger security

²Providing the services of disciplined, law-abiding and courteous workers

²Guarantee the security of lives and property of others who use roads

²Charging bus fares only as relevant to the service provided

²Issuing tickets relevant to the bus fare

e.g.

Sri Lanka Transport Board

Private Bus Service

Ceylon Railway Service

Transport

²Efficient and regular supply of services ²Supply of true information ²Supplying information impartially ²Making people aware of unexpected natural disasters

²Providing a quality service

Postal service

Media i nstitutions

Exchange of Information and Communication

(electronic/ printed)

For free distribution27

²Assuring public security

²Acting cordially with the public

²Safeguarding law and order

²Suppression and prevention of anti-social activities

²Providing a law abiding, fair and courteous service

² Providing relief services to the public on unexpected disaster situations

e.g.

Sri Lanka Police and security forces

Security Services

²Supplying a quality service

²Modernisation of services to suit timely requirements

²Supplying consumer services at affordable prices

²Office-bearers of Co-operative Society working honestly and dedicatedly for its progression

e.g.

Co-operative

Multi-Purpose Co-operative Societies

Co-operatives

²Providing maximum contribution to the protection of environment

²Giving maximum support to implement environmental laws and regulations

²Responding positively to public complaints on harming the environment

²Raising awareness about the importance of environmental conservation

e.g.

Ministry of Environment

Central Environmental Authority

Department of Wildlife

Environmental conservation

Activity

²Prepare a list of benefits the people would gain from public services like health, education and transport when they fulfil their duties and responsibilities properly.

societies

28For free distribution

Duties that should be fulfilled by the public who benefits from public services

All the citizens have a right to utilize public services properly and protect them. Fulfilment of one’s duties properly in relation to the utilization of such services helps immensely for the maintenance and improvement of them. Further, it contributes to establish the rights of other people to use them.

Let’s examine the duties that should be fulfilled by the citizens in relation to the utilization of such services.

Duties of citizensPublic Service ²Using water economically

²Refrain from misuse

²Paying bills on time

²Protecting instruments used in supplying water

²Informing the authorities about incidents regarding wastage of water.

Water supply

²Using electricity economically

²Protecting instruments used in supplying electricity

²Paying bills on time

²Avoiding the use of electricity illegally

²Informing relevant authorities about breakdowns

Electricity

²Following medical advice

²Being polite to the staff providing medical services

²Stopping the wastage of medicine provided free of charge

²Protecting property of the health service supplying institutes

²Making other people aware of good health habits

Health

For free distribution29

Duties of citizens who make use of public servicesPublic Service ²Engaging in academic activities properly

²Safeguarding your own dignity and that of the institution

²Respecting teachers

²Protecting the rights of other students

²Protecting the property and resources belonging to the institution

Education

²Protecting property of the transport services

²Being honest in paying the fees relevant to the service

²Being courteous and law-abiding when using transport services

²Being aware of the benefits that you and the country gain by using public transport services.

Transport

²Using communication services without affecting others Being courteous in communication

²Being critical in selecting TV programmes

²Making aware of relevant authorities about social requirements through media

Exchange of Information and Communication

²Giving support to combat crimes and anti-social activities

²Acting in co-operation with Police and the Security Forces

²Acting as a law-abiding citizen

Security Servicese.g. Sri Lanka PoliceSecurity Forces ²Getting the membership of the Co-operative Movement

²Regular participation in meetings of the society in which you are a member

²Electing honest and clever persons for the leadership of Co-operative Societies

²Supporting mutually

²Fulfillment of your requirements through Co-operatives

Co-operative Movement

30For free distribution

Duties of citizens who make use of public servicesPublic Service ²Contributing to environmental conservation

²Helping the law to captivate those who harm the environment

²Abiding by rules and regulations with regard to environmental protection.

²Raising awareness of the other people on environmental conservation

Institutions relevant to environmental conservation

Activity

²Copy the following table into your book and complete it.

Public serviceDuties that should be fulfilled by citizens

How fulfillment of duties help the progress of the service

Benefits achievable by the citizens when fulfilling those dutiesElectricity



Water



Environmental conservation





For free distribution31

Summary

 Public services are supplied in common to uplift the living conditions of people.

 Water Supply, education, health, communication, transport, etc. are examples for the public services utilized by us.

 Making use of these services systematically will contribute not only to the personal development but also to the development of the nation.

 Government provides several essential services free of charge.

 Private sector provides public services on the basis of charging money.

 Fulfilment of duties and responsibilities of the institutions which provide public services to the people helps to offer a quality service.

 Fulfilment of duties by the citizens towards the utilization of public services helps the maintenance and qualitative development of public services.

32For free distribution

02Democratic Society

Introduction

“Democracy” is a form of administration as well as a way of living. A democratic society is a self-disciplinary and consensual society in which people act in co-operation with one another based on freedom and equality and being respectful to the opinions of the majority. To ensure the existence of such a society, it is quite essential to develop democratic qualities in the citizens.

From this chapter, it is expected to establish the required competencies in students by,

²building up qualities that are needed for a democratic way of life

²giving an understanding about the rights and the duties of a child

²explaining the importance of controlling emotions positively

²explaining the need for leadership and emphasizing the importance of improving leadership qualities

²raising awareness of the way they should behave as followers to live like members of society, family and school.

Democratic features visible in the family and in the school

Democratic features of a family

Family is the smallest, basic and important unit that can be seen in any society. You have studied in Grade 7 under the unit “Our Family” that the family can be classified into two: nuclear family and extended family.

For free distribution33

A nuclear family – mother, father and children

Extended family - father, mother, children, grandparents, uncles, aunts, etc.

Your family can be a nuclear family. However, if you ask the elders in your family such as your mother, father, grandmother and grandfather, it would be clear that they had spent their childhood in an extended family. But at present, you can see plenty of nuclear families around you. Each and every member of the family has duties and responsibilities. Everyone is liable to fullfil them co-operatively and understandingly in a friendly manner.

Make decisions through discussions

Solve problems peacefully

Work co-operatively in house-hold chores

Secure equality

Enjoy the rights while fulfilling duties

Respect the leadership of parents and elders

Be patient to others' opinions and listen to them

Democratic features that can be seen in the family

Receive sufficient protection and love

34For free distribution

Working in collectively

A happy family

Children obtain democratic experience from the family. Democratic qualities such as recognition of leadership qualities, listening to others, and respecting their ideas and work collectively can be learnt by being a member of the family. Affection, love, kindness, compassion, protection and nutrition will determine the well-being of both children and the society they live in Fulfilment of the duties and responsibilities from parents to children and vice versa will be beneficial to all. Making decisions after discussions among family members at general occasions will be quite helpful for unity, harmony and betterment of the family.

e.g.

²Selection and preparation of meals ²Performing household chores collectively ²Keeping houses clean ²Entertainment and recreation ²Planning educational activities

It is more effective to discuss together and make decisions even at special occasions of the family.

e.g. ²Organization of various functions ²Purchase of a land/house ²Construction, carrying out alterations, repairing of a house ²Purchasing a vehicle ²Decisions on marriages

For free distribution35

In family affairs,

²tolerating the views of others lead to honour others. ²tolerating the views of others tend to honour the view of the majority. ²unity and cordiality in the family is improved by respecting the views of the majority

Liberal and peaceful environment in the family helps you improve your talents and skills. Treating parents and elders as leaders, seeking their advice and guidance, helping the family affairs and working collectively are some of the responsibilities of the children while enjoying freedom. Such a behaviour will assure the family progress as well as the progress of the society.

Activity

² Name 05 democratic features which you have identified as the features prevail in the family. ² Name several occasions where all the family members work in peace and harmony.

Democratic features seen in school

The school is the closest institution to the child next to his home. From childhood to adolescence a child leads a life as a student. Every child gets the opportunity of improving his or her skills and capabilities by making use of freedom, resources and opportunities available at school. This will enable them to achieve objectives of life successfully. Each and every child should try to achieve objectives in life which are more useful to oneself and to the society. There are many specific features that can be seen in a school in a democratic society.

36For free distribution

Compromising on the will of the majority

Respecting the leadership

Working in collaborationReceiving education, physical resources, textbooks, uniforms, sports and library facilities equally

Accepting and protecting common traditions, rules and regulations in the school

Holding positions in societies and meetings, expressing views and willingness

Accepting both victory and defeat indifferently and resolving the problems peacefully

Democratic features seen in school

Making correct decisions through discussion

All school children are fortunate to obtain equal opportunities in receiving free education. The valuable opportunity of receiving free education from primary education to the university level is something that you should try your best to achieve.

The school which consists of children from different social environments provides equal opportunities for education for all. The school also provides security and opportunities to develop various competencies of the students during the school hours. Disciplinary rules within the school are common to all. Textbooks, uniforms, mid-day meals, library and laboratory facilities are provided to all equally. The school also provides the students the opportunity to engage in co-curricular as well as extra curricular activities in order to develop their various competencies.

For free distribution37

Some co-curricular activities practised in school in order to familiarize democratic way of living are as follows:

²Conducting Literary Associations, Religious Associations, Subject-Related Associations, etc. ²Organizing national festivals, religious festivals, sports meets, cultural festivals, etc. ²Assigning duties as prefects, monitors, subject leaders, sports captains, etc. ²Organizing and holding competitions on dancing, singing, playing musical instruments, drawing, general knowledge, essay writing, debates, etc. ²Giving training and experience on cadetting, environmental pioneers, scouting, guiding first –aid services, etc. ²Organizing educational trips, field trips, exploration trips and excursions

Activity

² Name some of the co-curricular activities implemented in your school. ² Write five benefits that you can gain by taking part in those activities.

Rights and Responsibilities of children:

The most valuable asset of the parents is their children and they are the future resource of a country. Every religious leader has pointed out the importance of children by giving priority to them in their doctrines. Every society pays more attention on children. It is the responsibility of both the government and the adults to provide proper nutrition to children, protect them, provide suitable education, prepare the background for physical and mental growth, guide and assist them to be a person with refined personality. According to the United Nations Convention on Child Rights, every human being below eighteen years is considered as a child. The rights entitled to all children, irrespective of their gender, are recognized as Child Rights. These rights are listed under four themes.

² Right to protection

² Right to participation

² Right to development

² Right to existence

38For free distribution

United Nations Convention on Child Rights consists of a preamble and 54 Articles. Every member of the country is bound to protect and follow it. The United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) functions as an organization established to protect child rights. While enjoying their rights, children should in turn ensure that they fulfil their duties and obligations at every occasion. Rights and responsibilities are interconnected. It is also quite essential to enjoy rights and fulfil responsibilities for the well-being of the society. Rights without responsibilities are meaningless and self-centred.

Given below are some of the rights and responsibilities of children. Study them well.

Duties/responsibilities of a childRights of a child ²Engaging in educational activities well ²Respecting parents and teachers ²Maintaining discipline, adhering to rules and regulations and following traditions of the school

Right to education

²To be aware of personal hygiene ²Following good health habits ²Raising awareness in public on good health habits

Right to health facilities

²Contribution to social security ²Raising awareness in the society about social securityRight to the benefits of social security

²Religious well-being ²Respecting the religious beliefs of other religious groups

Right for freedom to hold a religious belief

²Expressing truth ²Expressing ideas harmless to othersRight to freedom of expression

²Selection of friends wisely ²Selection of friends to suit your age ²Refraining from stealing, cheating and harmful deeds

Right to maintain friendly relationships

²Developing one’s capabilities. ²Contribution to the social progressRight to participate in activities of societies and associations ²Respecting and obeying parents and elders ²Supporting others whenever possibleRight to get proper protection

For free distribution39

Institutions that safeguard child rights We often hear through media about various problems children face in the present society. Getting them involved in various abusive activities, harassments, sexual abuses and child labour are some of them. There are many reasons which cause the loss of equal opportunities for children while being subjected to oppression. Some of them are death, separation, working abroad, poverty, imprisonment, drug addiction, alcohol addiction of one or both parents and their less attention to children. Given below are some institutions which function for the purpose of protection of child rights and save children from these situations providing necessary support and guidance to them:

² National Child Protection Authority

² Department of Probation and Child Care Services

² Children and Women Bureau of Sri Lanka Police

Government officers providing services to children and families at regional level:

PositionOfficeServices providedChild Rights Promotion OfficerDivisional SecretariatProvide all the services related to child rights and co-ordinating facilities

Regional Child Protection OfficerDivisional SecretariatEnquire into problems concerning the protection of children and provide necessary support

Early Childhood Development OfficerDivisional SecretariatProvide facilities relevant to pre-school education and other early childhood servicesCounselling Officer of the Ministry of Women and Child Affairs

Divisional SecretariatProvide counselling services required for children and women

Social Services OfficerDivisional SecretariatProvide special welfare services of the government related to children

Women Development OfficerDivisional SecretariatProvide home-economic and vocational education services required for women and girls

Informal and Formal Education OfficerDivisional SecretariatProvide facilities to non-schooling children and children with special needs

40For free distribution

Activity

² Design a wall chart on “Child Rights and responsibilities”and display it. Include creative work such as essays, short stories, free verse, drawings and cartoons.

Various emotions

Your face is the best mirror which reflects your thoughts, feelings and emotions. Observe your face with a mirror to see how your facial expressions change when feel happy, sad, fearful or angry. Your body expressions in such situations may be crying, laughing, frowning, being silent, being frightened, being disappointed and being lethargic. Good emotions are delightful for oneself as well as for the society. However, if unfavourable emotions are not properly manipulated, they will cause harm not only to you but to the society too. For example, a person raged with anger may tend to scold others, assault them, destroy property and even cause death. We can hear from everyday news various incidents resulted in failing to control emotions. Discuss with your teacher about this. He/She will explain you.

Emotions and effects/reactions caused by them

Emotion

Happiness

Sorrow

Anger

Fear

Reaction

laughing, dancing, cheering, shedding happy tears, shouting, jumping

crying, sighing, wailing, withering face, beating the chest, reddening of eyes, perspiring

scolding, assaulting, trembling, crying, tongue twisting, gnashing, observing silence

trembling, screaming, widening of eyes, running, inability to speak, stammering,

For free distribution41

The above pictures show external reactions of the face on emotions. As a result of emotions, reactions inside the body such as high blood pressure and secretion of hormones, take place. When the unfavourable emotions continue, a person is subjected to physical, mental and social deterioration. Examples: physical illnesses, mental illnesses, creating various conflicts, imprisonment, addiction to drugs, attempting to commit suicide

Let’s control emotions positively

In a democratic society, all citizens should receive equal opportunities. But, inequality exists due to different reasons. Various emotions emerge according to the nature of the experiences we encounter. The responses in such situations should be proper and relevant. We should practise ourselves to identify, control and express properly in a way feelings or emotions that come to our minds in various occasions in our daily life.

Measures that can be taken to neutralize unfavourable emotions

² Exercises to calm the mind

•Meditation

•Growing plants

•Enjoying the environment

•Engaging in religious activities

•Keeping pets

42For free distribution

²Association of friends

•Discussion

•Mutual support

•Engaging in various activities like music, dancing, sports, etc

•Picnics

²Changing personal and environmental conditions causing unfavourable emotions

•Keeping home and office clean in an orderly manner

•Minimizing inequalities and differences

•Keeping the environment beautiful

•Acting cordially and collaboratively

•Working to a timetable

²Involvement in creative activities

•Composing poems and songs, writing books

•Performing dramas

•Engaging in aesthetic activities

•Landscaping

•Singing, dancing, painting, etc.

•Watching dramas and films

²Engaging in sports and physical exercises

•Engaging in an indoor or an outdoor sport or game

•Walking

•Doing physical exercises

•Swimming

For free distribution43

Let's establish democracy by managing emotions positively

Management of emotions in an optimistic way, as a citizen of a democratic society, will lead to the betterment of both, others' lives and one's own life.

Mental stress and emotions are quite natural but we should practise ourselves to control such emotions and to manage them effectively.

For this, strategies like, • pre-arrangement • working to a timetable • getting others' support and advice • listening • following rules, regulations, customs and traditions • developing self confidence etc, can be used.

Through these, it is possible to achieve objectives in life easily without being subjected to various harassments. You should determine to become a democratic citizen who appreciates freedom and equality, and protect the rights of others while fulfilling one’s own duties and responsibilities. For this, you should support your friends. Then you will

²a person who does not become a victim of emotions as you have balanced personality ²automatically generate in you features like easy going characteristics, smiling and pleasant features with attractive discourse. ²be a person who does not hurt others' feelings. ²act co-operatively and peacefully in the society. ²be trusted and respected by others.

Activity

²Imagine that you have faced some positive emotions and negative emotions. Collect information on them with favourable results and unfavourable results, separately.

² Based on the information collected, write five meaningful sentences on the importance of controlling emotions positively as a citizen of a democratic country. Or else, compose a poem, a song or draw a picture and display the best one in the classroom.

44For free distribution

Let's improve the leadership qualities by identifying the need for leadership

Whenever people act collectively, there should be a leader to direct them. The task of a leader is to direct and motivate the family, several people or a group of people for the fulfilment of an objective or objectives.

²Leadership is the process through which people are directed and persuaded to achieve a clear objective.

²Leadership is the ability to persuade others, make them dedicated and encourage them to achieve the objectives of an institution or of an organization.

²Leadership is not a methodology or a technological skill. It is the matter of opening up of the heart. Through this, not only you but others too can be stimulated.

²“Great Leadership” is not a methodology to follow. It is a humanistic achievement that generates in the heart and bonds with the hearts of others.

Occasions where leadership can be seen in society

²Within the family - parents, adult children

²In school - principal, vice principal, assistant principals, sectional heads, class teacher, prefects, management committee leaders, monitors, subject leaders, etc.

²In the society - religious leaders, community leaders, political leaders, heads of institutions, etc

Qualities of a leader (Leadership qualities)

²Communication skill Presentation, explantation, speech, orderliness, listening, firmness, etc. ²Problem solving skill Understanding problems, collecting information, analysing, finding solutions, implementing ²Organizational skill Deciding the objective, planning, organizing, Making decisions ²Manipulative skill Deciding the target, organizing teams, controlling, achieving the targets ²Human relationships Sociability, attraction, ability to keep inter-relationships, maintaining relationships ²Affectivity Friendliness, affability, sensibility, cheerfulness

For free distribution45

Let's us identify various leadership styles in the society

According to the nature and the activities of the persons who provide leadership to the society, leadership styles differ. When we have a look at the leaders of a family, an institution, an organization or of a country analytically, many differences can be identified. There, you have to attempt to become a democratic leader and to establish the expected democratic society.

Autocratic leadership style

- Non acceptance of public opinion

- Refusal to change

- Act very strictly

- Take decisions unanimously

- Threatening, intimidation

- Not allowing to develop capabilities

Corrupted leadership style

- Misuse of public property

- Engaging in fraud, corruption and theft

- Display of wrong precedents

- Disregard for law, rules, regulations, customs and traditions

- Greater Inclination towards privacy

Nominal leadership style

- Not working to uplift the public welfare

- Absence of good leadership qual-ities

- Lack of clear targets and expectations

- Not making any changes

- Attempting to be prominent

Democratic leadership style

- Accepting and respecting public opinion

- Maintaining close relationship with the public

- Encouraging the public

- Listening to conflicts and solving them

- Providing opportunities to develop the abilities of the public

- Appreciating and approving of freedom and equality

46For free distribution

Why does society need leaders?

Leadership is essential to direct a particular society for the fulfilment of its expectations, aims and objectives. Lack of dynamic and productive leadership leads to the deterioration of the family, school, institution, organization as well as the country. Discuss examples of such situations with the teacher.

There are many reasons to be a leader. Some of them are given below:

²To develop organizations, institutions and a state with a correct vision

²To set goals and direct towards achieving the goals

²To plan properly

²To face challenges and objections

²To overcome challenges and objections democratically

²To have followers attached

²To encourage followers

²To distribute and utilize resources properly

²To resolve and minimize conflicts

Activity:

² Collect information and photographs of religious, political and community leaders who inspire you.

² Prepare a booklet including information on the contribution they have made to establish and strengthen the democratic society.

Features of democratic leadership

In many countries of the world today, a democratic system of administration exists. The United States of America, France, Great Britain, Swaziland, India and Sri Lanka are examples for democratic governments. The system of electing political leaders in such countries is based on general elections. At elections, people elect leaders of their choice, as representatives. Models of political leadership directly affects every sphere of the country. Their precedents determine the sustenance of a democratic society.

For free distribution47

Some qualities a democratic leader should possess:

 Humanity  Self-confidence

 Honesty  Assertiveness

 Dedication  Heeding/listening

 Equality  Impartiality

 Friendliness  Sociability

 Creativity  Far-sightedness

 Ability to make correct decisions  Helping others

Leader and follower

²Leader is the person who directs a team.

²The follower acts under the direction of the leadership.

²The follower should be ready to act in a trustworthy manner when the leader directs the team with confidence.

²It is the duty of the follower to support the leader to achieve correct objectives without expecting any benefits.

²Dedication and enthusiasm are advantageous for a follower to become a great leader.

²The leader and the follower are mutually bound together by responsibilities.

Situations in which leadership and fellowships are visible in the society

Family, school and society are structured by a number of groups consisting of leaders and followers. Some examples are given below:

Leader Follower

Father - other members of the family

Principal - staff, students

Chief Incumbent of the temple - other monks/lay devotees

Member of Parliament - voters

President - citizens of the country

48For free distribution

When we consider school as another example, we can find many leaders and followers too. Various leaders can sometimes become followers. The duty of leaders and followers is to perform one’s duties and responsibilities properly. Look at the following examples:

Leader Follower

Principal - staff, students

Class teacher - students in the classroom

Prefect - students of the school

Monitor - students in the classroom

Subject leader - students studying the subject

Democratic way of living

We can see many conflicts and disagreements prevailing among persons in the contemporary society. Reason for this is the competition and mistrust prevalent among them. Nobody can live alone in society. When we act as a group we should respect others, tolerate their views and act in a fair manner. Then, conflicts and disputes can be minimized. Respect for the accepted customs and traditions, laws, rules and regulations, act with equality and co-existence are the features that can be seen in a democratic way of living. The specific feature of such a society is the concern not only to work for one’s own benefit but for the betterment of others too. A democratic way of living is to transform democratic features into life habits of a person and act as a good citizen in the society.

Qualities relevant to the democratic way of living

Respecting the view of the others

Acting co-operatively

Enjoying rights while performing responsibilities

Arriving at decisions through discussion

Acting with self-discipline

Respecting equality

Acting with transparency

Acting honestly and in a law abiding manner

Respecting the rights of others

Tolerating the views of others

For free distribution49

Democratic way of living guarantees the well-being of society

Democracy can be identified as a system of government as well as a way of living. The reason to identify it as such is the necessity of the establishment of democratic features for the well-being of the society. Let us consider how the democratic way of living contributes to the well-being of the society.

²Improvement of harmony in the society

- Relationships develop when every community group is respected and treated equally. - People are satisfied when their needs and requirements are fulfilled as expected. - Contribution and representation in every activity are entitled.

²Establishment of a society with minimum conflicts

- Respect the will of the majority - Providing opportunities for the representation of minority - Respecting all communities and their cultures

²Creation of a law abiding society - Citizens being law abiding - Acting in a just and peaceful manner - Recognition and respect for one another

²Protection of the rights of all

- Accepts rights - Fulfills responsibilities - Appreciates freedom

Activity

² Write an essay on “Existence of democratic ways contributes to social wellbeing”. Display the best essay in the class.

50For free distribution

Summary

 Democratic features in a family ensure well-being of the family.

 It is important, as members of the family unit, to develop the qualities of democracy for the democratic way of living.

 Being member of the school society, you as a student, should follow the democratic features of the school.

 Both enjoying the child rights and rendering the duties are important.

 There are several institutions to protect the child rights. They have many duties to be performed.

 Various emotions and feelings that occur in one's mind affect one's behaviour.

 Controlling and managing emotions in an optimistic or positive way is very important to all as citizens of a democratic society.

 Democratic leadership qualities should be identified and practised.

 There are qualities that should be developed as a leader and as a follower.

 Democratic way of living guarantees the well-being of the society.

For free distribution51

03Multicultural Society

Introduction

People belonging to different races, and different religions and people who speak different languages may live in one country. A society consisting of such different groups is called a multicultural society.

By studying this chapter you will be able to understand:

²factors that cause for emerging multicultural societies

²qualities that should be practised as a citizen of a multicultural society

²how a peaceful society with minimum conflicts can be established

A conversation that took place among the students of Grade Eight in Namalyaya Maha vidyalaya during the Citizenship Education period is given below. Read and understand it well.

Januda ( Culture is the way how we live, wear and behave, isn't it?

Dewni ( Not only that, culture includes the way we speak, eat, and all our activities related to it. Every element developed by our ancestors belongs to it.

Chenethu ( What are those elements?

Fathima ( Stupas, temples, artistic creations, tanks and anicuts, kovils, churches are some of those elements. Don’t you remember, we learned them when we were in Grade 7?

Ansar ( Well, now let's write a definition on culture.

Devi ( Culture means all the activities in life style, clothing, behaving, communicating, and worshipping. In addition, it includes arts and crafts, traditions and customs...

52For free distribution

Dewni ( Culture is the device that handles all our activities behind us.

Devi ( It controls us with or without our knowledge. doesn't it?

Ansar ( We all have a particular culture. It can differ from region to region, religion to religion, and race to race. but every human being on this earth has a culture.

Teacher ( I feel great pleasure about the things children in my class know about culture. Actually, when I heard what you said about culture, I have almost nothing to teach you.

Culture

A man behaves according to a culture from his cradle to grave. Therefore, culture is the main force that directs any society forward. No person can be in isolation without a culture. The term —culture ˜ has been defined by different anthropologists in different ways. Two of those definitions are given below:

Culture is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, customs and any other capabilities and habits acquired by a human as a member of society.

E.B.Tylor (Primary Culture)

Culture is the way of collective living of people who are in a particular area. Rituals, customs, habits, morals, social institutions, arts and religion depict their culture.

Prof. Wimal Dissanayake (Critiques)

A simple definition derived from the above definitions and the conversation of the students of Grade 8 is given below:

Culture is the totality of whole, acquired by man on knowledge, beliefs, customs, arts and livelihood.

For free distribution53

Cultural elements

Multiculture

Fathima ( Januda, what is meant by the term multiculture?Januda ( People belonging to different races live in one country. They observe different religions, speak different languages and follow different customs and rituals. Such a society is called a multicultural society.

Dewni ( Shall I give a simple example? Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim and Burgher communities live in Sri Lanka. Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Islam as well as those who speak Sinhala, Tamil and English also live in this country. Therefore, ours is a multicultural society and a multicultural country as well.

Ansar ( Yes, That diversity is known as cultural diversity.

Dewi ( But, there are differences among those cultures, aren't there? Most of the countries such as United States of America, and India are countries with multicultural societies. There are many races as well as social groups speaking different languages and observing different religions in those countries.

54For free distribution

Most of the countries in the present world can be regarded as multicultural societies. Every citizen in such societies must work with mutual trust and collective conscience.

Some of the examples for countries with multicultural societies are as follows:

Sri Lanka

India

The United States of America

The Great Britain

Activity

²Construct a simple definition on culture, through the facts you learn about culture. Discuss that definition with the other students.

Multicultural Society

A society with multicultural characteristics is known as a multicultural society. In such a society, all those who speak different languages, observe different religions and follow different customs should work together. It minimizes conflicts and enhances co-operativeness. It builds up a sustainable peace and develops the country.

Since every society in the modern world is multicultural, we have to develop many qualities when we live in such a society. As a global citizen, you are expected to live in such a society by improving those qualities.

For free distribution55

Some of those qualities are as follows:

• Respecting all those who belong to every ethnic group

• Safeguarding the rights of the people of all ethnic groups

• Not discriminating any religious or ethnic group

• Safeguarding the cultural heritages of all religious and ethnic groups

• Listening to the opinions of others and accepting them, if they are reasonable

• Fulfilling the duties concisely

Characteristics of a multicultural society

By now, you have already understood the fact that a society in which different races live, different religious groups exist and different traditions follow, is a multicultural society. You can recognize those multicultural features from this lesson separately.

Existence of different ethnic groups

Different types of ethnic groups live in a multicultural society. Those ethnic groups are expected to work peacefully and collectively. It is essential for the existence of a multicultural society. We must think of our country and work as a nation, disregarding racial differences. As an example, we can see that all people in Sri Lanka live in harmony, disregarding whether they are Sinhalese, Tamils, Muslims or Burghers.

Various ethnic groups

56For free distribution

Existence of people of different faiths

Another salient feature of a multi-ethnic society is the existence of the people who follow different religions. It is essential to respect one's own religion as well as that of the others. We should not defame the others' religions. We can take all the good things from those religions that are helpful to make our lives successful. We all must determine to continue a mutual co-existence among all religious communities.

Devotees paying homage in different religious places

Existence of people who speak different languages

For the betterment of a multi-cultural society, it is beneficial to;

²learn other language as wells as one's own tongue ²use those languages where necessary to exchange ideas ²consider every language equally.

Characters (letters) belonging to various languages

For free distribution57

Existence of different customs and traditions

Different customs and traditions can be seen in a multicultural society. Those customs and rituals are bestowed to the next generation by the culture. It is important to respect and safeguard them and extract what is good. We should not condemn others' customs or traditions.

Various customs

Existence of different cultural heritage

Every culture has its own cultural elements. Cultural heritage is the reflection of our cultural identity. For example, stupas and temples can be identified as the heritage of Buddhist culture. By safeguarding cultural features, prestige and pride of a country can be exhibited. Protecting and respecting the heritage, will be helpful to the proper existence of a multicultural society.

58For free distribution

Various cultural heritages

Cultural diversity of Sri Lanka

As Sri Lanka is a multicultural country. Different races, religious groups and communities speaking different languages live there.

Following table indicates the population of the country according to ethnicity and religions:

PercentagePopulationReligionPercentagePopulationEthnicity70'214"222"844Buddhist74'915"173"820Sinhala

12'62"554"606Hindu11'22"270"924Tamil

9'71"967"227Islam4'1842"323Muslim

7'4150"906Catholic/Christian9'21"869"820Burgher

0'19"440Other0'5106"836Other

Teacher-in-charge of Citizenship Education in Grade 8 of Namal Yaya Maha Vidyalaya advised the students to study the above table carefully. After that, she gave the following questions on a task sheet.

For free distribution59

 Different communities in Sri Lanka

 Different religious groups in Sri Lanka.

A conversation that took place in relation to this task sheet is given below:

Ansar :- Sinhalese, Tamil, Muslim, Burgher and Malay communities live in our country.

Narmadha :- Not only that, people from many other countries also live in our country.

Chenethu :- Religious groups such as Buddhists, Hindus, Islam, Catholics and Christians also live here.

Ansar :- Yes, That’s true. There can be people who believe in other religions as well.

Devni :- There are people who speak Sinhala, Tamil and English.

Ansar :- Sri Lanka is a multiracial, multi-religious and multilingual country. Hence, Sri Lanka is a multicultural country.

Narmada :- Diversity of Sri Lankan culture can be explained in association with languages, religions, customs and cultural heritage.

Chenethu :- I can give another idea according to this table. People who belong to one ethnic group can follow different religions. For example, Sinhalese can follow Catholicism and Christianity.

Activity

²Name a few places worshipped by all ethnic and religious communities in Sri Lanka, in common. ²Mention three duties to be fulfilled by us, as citizens of a multicultural society.

60For free distribution

Different cultural traditions, customs and festivals

Different cultures exist in Sri Lanka as it is a multicultural country. There are many cultural places related to those cultures. The Temple of the Sacred Tooth Relic, Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi, Katharagama Devalaya, Koneshvaram Kovil, Nallur Kovil, Thalavila church, Madu church, and Davatagaha Mosque are some of them. In addition to that, religious festivals and matrimonial customs of different Church Christian cultures are examples for cultural elements.

Customs related to different communities

As a multicultural country, three main community groups such as the Sinhalese, the Tamils, and the Muslims live in Sri Lanka. Every function performed from one's birth to death and even after death connected with culture.

Customs are both what we should do or what we should avoid doing.

Customs, traditions and festivals related to different religions and the importance of them

There are four main religions in Sri Lanka as a multicultural country. They are Buddhism, Hinduism, Catholicism/Christianity and Islam. Different rituals and customs, traditions, and festivals related to those religions are there.

Main cultures of Sri Lanka have been built on the basis of religions. Customs and festivals related to those cultures have been built on the basis of religious objectives. Following are the cultures based on religions in our country.

• Buddhist culture

• Hindu culture

• Christian/Catholic culture

• Islam culture

For free distribution61

Buddhist culture

Vesak festival

Poson festival

The Buddhists use Buddhist teachings in order to build up good life. The doctrine of Lord Buddha discloses the way for a better life and to achieve spiritual freedom. Five precepts are the compulsory precepts to be followed by laymen. The custom of the Buddhists is to lead day-to-day life by doing religious observances, appreciating the qualities of the Buddha. Every aspect of life of a Buddhist from his birth to death, is closely related to Buddhist culture.

The most important three religious festivals of the Buddhists are as follows:

• Vesak festival

• Poson festival

• Esala festival

Vesak festival is very important for the Buddhists since it is for commemorating three events of Buddha; the birth, the enlightenment and the Parinibbana (Passing away). It is believed that the Buddhist mission led by Arahath Mahinda Thero arrived in Sri Lanka on a Poson full Moon Poya Day. Therefore, the Poson festival is celebrated by the Buddhists in a grand scale.

After attaining the Great Buddhahood, Lord Buddha preached his first sermon on an Esala Poya Day. Therefore, Esala Festival is one of the prominent festivals for Buddhists. Observing Sil by giving priority to worldly and spiritual Poojas, treating the sick, conducting sermons, organizing Dansalas, (Refectories where free meals are offered to everybody), giving alms to the needy and erecting pandals, are commonly done by the Buddhists along with these festivals. In addition to that, on every fullmoon poya day, sil and meditation programmes and other meritorious activities are organized. You may have frequently heard the blessings of people in modern society such as "May the blessings of Buddha be upon you!’’, " May the Triple Gems bless you! " . It is a good nature of a person who values Buddhist culture.

62For free distribution

Hindu culture

Thai-Pongal and Deepavali festivals

The Tamils whose religion is Hinduism perform their religious observances according to Hindu culture. The Hindus conduct Poojas for their gods such as Shiva, Vishnu, Ganesha and goddess Kali. They start their daily routine after worshipping their gods. Some of the religious festivals of the Hindus are as follows:

• Thai-pongal

• Deepavali

• Maha Shivarathri The Hindus in Sri Lanka perform Hindu religious rituals in different occasions in their lives. From the conception to the birth of a child and in many occasions after that, such as, naming ceremony, customs of marriages and funerals are followed according to Hindu culture.

Christian / Catholic culture

Christmas festival

Christian and Catholic devotees celebrate two religious festivals.

• Christmas• Easter Festival

Christmas is held on the 25th of December in order to celebrate the birth of Jesus Christ. Good Friday is for the commemoration of the Crucifixion and Easter is for the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

For free distribution63

Baptizing a child and making him a child of God is an important religious custom of every Catholic/ Christian. Engagements as well as weddings and all other important occasions are done in church. When a Christian dies, praying for his soul, and burial are done according to Christian / Catholic culture. Before performing any important task and as an everyday habit, every Christian venerates God.

Islamic culture

Ramadan/Ramadhan

Haj/Hajj

Islam devotees hold three main cultural festivals.

• Milad un-Nabi festival

• Ramadan festival (Id-ul-Fitr)

• Haj festival

Giving alms to the poor and beggars to commemorate the birth of Mohammed Nabi is done in Milad un-Nabi festival. Fasting from the dawn of the day to dusk continuously for a period of 30 days is a custom followed during the Ramadan period. At the end of the fasting period, Ramadan festival is held. Haj festival is held to celebrate the holy pilgrimage of the Prophet Mohammed's to Macca, the holy land of the Muslims. Many Muslims from Sri Lanka too, go on Haj pilgrimage. Those who do not go there, visit the Masjid in their own areas and engage in prayers.

The Muslims are compelled to do everything in their day-to-day life according to the customs related to Islam culture. It ranges from the conception of a child to his death. For instance, it can be seen in the customs and rituals they perform at birth of a child as well as in weddings.

64For free distribution

Activity

²Organize a field trip to visit a cultural venue of another ethnic or a religious group in your area or in any other areas. Get the guidance and instructions of your subject teacher for this. Use the task sheet given below: (e.g.:- Temple of the sacred Tooth Relic in Kandy, Madu Church, Nallur Kovil, Red Masjid in Modara or any other place of your convenience)

²The itinerary of the trip

²Objectives of the trip

²Things watched/seen there

²Other cultural elements

²Experience you gained by seeing those cultural elements and by exchanging ideas.

Other multicultural countries

You already know that many countries in the world have multicultural societies. Let us discuss the multicultural nature of India and the United States of America.

India

India is unique among the countries with multi-cultures in the world. It is an outstanding feature that the Indian people have been co-operative from the past to the present as a multicultural society. Influence of Buddhism can be cited as one of the reasons for that.

Following are some of the information about ethnic and religious composition of India. It reveals the multi-ethnic and multicultural nature of Indian society.

ReligionsLanguagesRaces

Hinduism, Catholicism, Islam, Buddhism, Shaivism

Hindi, Urdu,Tamil, English, Marathi, Malayalam, Panjabi, Thelingu, Gujarati, Kannada, Sanskrit

Tamil, Urdu, Bengali, Muslim, Banjara, Chakma, Marathi, Munda

For free distribution65

As a multi-ethnic country, India has taken the following steps to ensure harmony among different ethnic groups:

Afghanistan

Nepal

PakistanIndia

Bhutan

Bangladesh

Sri Lanka

Maldives

²Treating all ethnic, religious and language groups equally.

²Using English and Hindi as official languages (Tamil Nadu state does not accept Hindi as an official language.)

²Having knowledge on another language except the official languages by every citizen.

²Taking steps to safeguard the rights and freedom of individuals to follow their own religion.

With the ethnic, religious and linguistic diversity, India has come forward in the modern world. The sense of nationalism has grown up among the Indians since all citizens work together ignoring ethnic, religious and linguistic differences. Hence, It has contributed to make India a powerful country in the world.

The United States of America (USA)

The United States of America is also a country with different ethnic, religious and language groups. It has become a multicultural society since the people who have migrated from different countries live there. Moreover, the USA has become one of the most powerful countries in the world as all work collectively with a sense of co-operativeness.

66For free distribution

Following information is about the multicultural nature of the United States of America. Study it carefully.

Religions LanguagesEthnic groupsProtestant Christians, Roman Catholics, other Christians, Muslims, Buddhists, Jewish

English, Spanish, Samoan, Cameroonian, Karuk, Hawaiian, Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, German, French, Russian, Italian

The White, the Black, Asians, Red Indians, Alaskans, Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders

Steps taken by the United States of America to maintain multicultural nature of the country

• Recognizing English as the official language

• Not recognizing any religion as the state religion

• Granting equal rights for all citizens

• Accepting democracy and working according to it

Cultural identity

Every ethnic, religious and language group has its own special culture. A particular culture can be distinguished from that of another through cultural identity. Every group tries to safeguard its own cultural identity.

e.g. :- Sri Lankan cultural identity

One's own cultural identity

We all have our own unique culture. It is the cultural identity. It is our duty to safeguard that cultural identity. For example, we all must safeguard cultural identities of Sinhala, Tamil and Muslim communities and the identities of the Buddhists, Christians, Catholics, Hindus and Islamic as well. The culture can be transmitted from one generation to the other, only by safeguarding it. To own a glorious culture, one should safeguard one's own cultural identity.

For free distribution67

Cultural identity and national harmony

All ethnic and religious groups pay attention to safeguard their own cultural identity. At the same time, it is important to respect the other cultures too, while safeguarding the elements of them. It leads to ensure national harmony. A country can achieve its prosperity only when every cultural group works in harmony while protecting its own cultural identity. The aggregate of all cultures in a country forms its national culture. It is a duty and responsibility of all to ensure the national culture which is the path for national harmony.

That need is emphasized in our national anthem as well.

—...Eka mawakage daru kela bewina

Yamu yamu wee nopama...˜

When we live as citizens of a multi-ethnic society, it is important to respect the other cultures. It is our duty to respect our culture as well as the others' and refrain from harming them. Then only the mutual trust is built among ethnic groups. It protects national harmony and builds sustainable peace.

Importance of building up national harmony and sustainable peace while safeguarding one's own cultural identity

When we work as a nation, while safeguarding our cultural identities, mutual rapport develops. Then one ethnic or religious group may not look at the other groups with suspicion. Then, mutual rapport, trust and reconciliation is built up among the people. Development of a country takes place only if all the citizens of the country work together as one. You must determine to work with a sense of nationality from your childhood disregarding all ethnic, religious and linguistic divisions. It is the prime aim of this subject.

68For free distribution

Advantages of building national harmony and sustainable peace

²Conflicts are minimized by working with mutual trust and understanding ²Harmony is ensured among ethnic groups ²Everyone contributes for the development of the country ²People are compelled to work collectively and harmoniously ²People contribute to the development of the country as they engage in productive economic activities. ²One is compelled to fulfil one’s duties while respecting cultural diversity. ²A sustainable peace is established.

Activity

²Write an article to the wallpaper on the topic of "The importance of safeguarding culture." ²Write an essay on the topic of the importance of national harmony. Make a booklet collecting all the essays of students and getting them edited. Donate it to the school library.

Summary

 The main force that leads a society is its culture.

 A society with multicultural characteristics is known as a multicultural society.

 Most of the countries in the world have multicultural societies.

 Different racial groups, religious groups and languages exist in a multicultural society.

 Different customs and different heritages can be seen in a multicultural society.

 When living in a multicultural society, everyone protecting his/her own cultural identity and responding to that of others are very important. It is a reliable way to build up national unity and peace among various ethnic, racial and religious groups.

For free distribution69

04Contemporary Issues

Introduction

Natural disasters, accidents, hazards, improper life habits can be cited as the most powerful challenges for the protective existence of human society. Natural disasters are a common phenomenon in the ecosystem. They may be conducive to the balance of natural ecosystems. However, at present these disasters have become more frequent and threatening to human existence because of the careless activities of human beings.

After studying this lesson, you will be able to understand,

²how accidents and disasters occur

²measures to be taken to minimize those accidents and disasters

²various institutions from which assistance can be obtained in a disastrous situation

²about the waste management process

²harmful habits, improper use of drugs and prevention from the bad effects of them.

²It is also expected from this lesson to set the background to improve your knowledge, attitude and skills to contribute towards the sustainable development of the country while carrying out an affordable life style.

The accidents and disasters faced by man in modern society can be divided into two.

1' Natural disasters 2' Disasters caused by human activities

70For free distribution

Floods

Droughts

Storms/Tornado

Thunder bolts

Wild fire

Absence of precautionary strategies (blindness/burns)

Improper disposal of garbage (Dengue)

Misuse of technological and electrical equipment

Mines and excavations (menace of files mosquitoes)

Unprotected constructions

Improper use of chemicals(Kidney disease)

Vehicle accidents (loss of lives)

Earth tremors

Tsunami

Earthquakes

Natural Disasters

Disasters caused by human activities

Natural disasters

Unfavourable conditions caused by extreme nature of the natural phenomena of the earth and its surroundings can be termed as natural disasters. Natural disasters occur without any interference of man but it is harmful to both man and his properties.

Natural disasters occur due to two main reasons;

1. Due to internal physical processes of the earth e.g. : Tsunami, earthquakes, earth tremors, earth slips, etc.2. Due to the changes in weather and climatic conditions. e.g. : Floods, droughts, storms, lightening, cyclones, bush fires, el nino, la nino, etc.

For free distribution71

Floods

Excessive rain and high tides naturally lead to floods and there are other causes as well. Irregular urban development, improper drainage systems, illegal constructions on land reservations on sides of canals and the discharge of waste water into the waters of the canals are other causes for floods. Sri Lanka receives plenty of rainfall throughout the year. Therefore, constant flooding in most parts of the country is an issue. Flooding is natural, but human activity contributes mostly towards flooding.

Human activities towards flooding:

Sand mining from a river

²Deforestation

²Filling up marshy lands

²Sand mining from rivers

²Digging up mines

²Improper disposal of waste that cannot be decomposed easily

²Illegal constructions on river banks

To minimize damage caused by floods:

²Rush to a secure place to avoid flood prone areas

²Avoid entering flood affected areas on foot or by vehicles

²Avoid contact with broken or fallen electric cables

²Refrain from eating flood affected food

²Refrain from using water from the affected areas

²Strictly follow the advice given by the relevant authorities such as: - Disaster Management Centre - Meteorological Department - Police - Local government institutions

72For free distribution

Floods may occur due to natural causes in addition to human activities.e.g. :- Blocking of estuaries on river banks (Kalu Ganga)

Cyclones

Violent and destructive winds that occur in tropical areas are known as cyclones. They take place centralizing low pressure zones in the atmosphere. Cyclones originate as a system of wind that blows clock wise and anti-clock wise. The speed of winds may exceed 350-400 k.m.p.h. Torrential rain accompanies heavy winds. Heavy winds and heavy rain can cause loss of lives and property. The cyclone that entered Sri Lanka on the 24th November 1978 took away 900 human lives and caused much damage to property as well.

Measures to be taken towards safety during a storm

The Meteorological Department issues repeated warnings through the media. When such warnings are issued, one should:

²withdraw from affected areas

²go to a protected place

²take away a pre-arranged pack which consists of essential and light items with

-bottles of water

-biscuits

-a torch

-a battery operated radio.

If you are staying at home:

²check whether the walls and the roof are safe.

²remove all trees and branches of trees that can be harmful to the house.

²disconnect electricity.

For free distribution73

Thunder storms

Thunder and lightening is a natural phenomenon. Thunder follows lightening. Lightening occurs when the water present in the high cumulonimbus (storm clouds) gets charged due to speedy powerful air waves that keep running up and by rubbing water droplets each other. Positive charges collect in the top layers of the cloud and negative charges collect in the bottom layers. An electrical discharge occurs when the amount of charges reach a certain level. It is known as lightening and thundering. The rise in temperature during day time and convection during the months, March – April, October – November cause heavy thunder storms. However, there can be thunder storms at any time of the year.

How can the damage of a thunder-storm be avoided?

In a rainy situations:

²avoid isolated open spaces, places or tall trees

²avoid horse riding, riding bicycles and travelling on tractors. (open vehicles)

²refrain from using telephones

²refrain from touching metal items

²unplug electric items from plug points

²refrain from using electrical items

Tsunami

Earthquakes on the seabed, nuclear explosions, volcanic eruptions and meteors are the causes for tsunami. When a tsunami occurs, powerful waves that originate in sea water spread in all directions. These waves cause a lot of damages to the coastal areas.

74For free distribution

In history, the Tsunami disaster that took place on the 26th of December 2004 was the most destructive disaster that ever happened in this region. Approximately 31,500 people who lived in coastal areas, including passengers travelling in vehicles like buses, vans, cars and even in a train lost their lives from this disaster unexpectedly arrived. Around 550,000 people were displaced. Houses, tourist hotels, fishing harbours and boats, vehicles and other properties were heavily damaged. It directly affected the coastal areas of Sri Lanka and other countries such as India, Indonesia and Thailand.

Human activities affected to heighten destruction in the Tsunami

• Removal of natural vegetation in the coastal areas

• Destruction of mangroves

• Damage to coral reefs

• Removal of sand bars in coastal areas

Measures to be taken to minimize damages caused by the Tsunami

• Pay attention to the announcements given by the media

• Withdraw from the affected areas when warnings have been issued.

• Make others aware

• Be alert on the signs of a Tsunami

• Rush to a safe area immediately

• Be aware of large tidal waves that can emerge at once and disappear

Drought

Animals affected by drought

In simple terms, a drought is a period of insufficient rain to fulfil man’s requirements with water. Drought that occurs due to insufficient rain is identified as a climatic drought. Droughts caused by insufficient supply of water are referred to as hydrological droughts. According to a climatic report from the Ministry of Forest Conservation and Environment, a drought is a period in which a district receives less than 75% of its usual rainfall.

For free distribution75

Similarly a period without rain for 15 consecutive days is also identified as a period of drought. As the South East, North Central and North West regions of Sri Lanka frequently face droughts, the following unfavourable and negative outcomes can occur.

Man and the environment partaking the destructive effects of drought

²Shortage of drinking water

²Disruption to generate hydro electricity

²Drying up of streams and small tanks

²Reduction in ground water levels

²Loss of human lives

²Destruction of crop cultivations

²Destruction to wild animals

To safeguard from drought:

²Do not destroy forest cover

²Do not expose soil to extreme direct heat

²Conserve water

²Do not pollute water in streams, canals and rivers

²Plant trees, creepers and re-forest

²Protect hydro catchment areas

²Use rain water harvest tanks

Man consumes a large quantity of natural resources. As a result, the damage caused to the environment is very high. If this damage is not minimized the damage caused by natural disasters will also increase. As responsible citizens, it is our duty to avoid human activities causing natural disasters. Given in the chart are some guidance for us to follow:

76For free distribution

Protecting sand bans in coastal areasProtecting mangroves

Avoid setting fire to forests

Restricting improper mining

Not erecting unauthorized constructions in coastal and highland areas

Avoid deforestation

Measures that can be taken to minimize natural disasters

Refraining from improper disposal of nondegradable waste matter

Refraining from improper sand mining from rivers

Refraining from coral reef mining

Steps to be taken to minimize damages during a disaster

Many people become victims of disasters. On such occasions it is our duty to offer help as responsible citizens. Some immediate actions, we could take, are as follows:

Medical treatments for victims

Distributing aids

² Being alert to awareness-raising messages issued various relevant institutes and organizations

² Informing relevant institutions that provide services to minimize damage

² Saving the victims

² Giving proper first aid

² Taking victims to hospitals immediately

² Making the hospitals and security sections aware of the disaster or the accident

² Launching humanitarian activities for the victims

² Assisting the defence and health service providers

For free distribution77

Soldiers on a rescue operation

In a disaster, it is our duty to protect properties of the victims. It is also important to support victims with compassion, safeguarding their self-dignity.

We must also prevent theft, looting and other anti-social activities. We must take steps to provide food, clothes, drinking water and temporary shelter for the victims. It is our responsibility to help the government officers and other helping organizations for the proper distribution of aids provided by the government institutions, voluntary organizations and international organizations. It is the responsibility of the officers of respective institutions to provide water, electricity, communication facilities and to re-establish transport services.

Institutions from which assistance can be taken when a disasters situation arises

Disaster Management centresHospital

Police

Meteorological Department

Local Government (Municipal councils/Urban councils/Pradeshiya Sabha)

Red-cross organization

Fire Brigade

Three security forcesInstitutions from which assistance can be obtained when a disastrous situation arises

78For free distribution

Activity

²Prepare a file of information which consists of newspaper reports, photographs etc. related to disasters that take place due to human activities. ²Prepare a catalogue mentioning the institutions to which a natural disaster or any other hazard caused by human activities can be informed. ²From the recent past, Sri Lanka has become a natural disaster prone country where earth slips and floods are abundant. Write two suggestions that can be used to avoid those situations. ²During disasters, ''Mass media play a major role.'' Prove this, with examples from Sri Lanka.

Telephone numbers that can assist you in an emergency

110 Emergency Fire Extinguish and Ambulance Services

118 Operation Centre for National Security

119 Police Emergency Services

1959 Media Centre – National Hospital, Sri Lanka

1969 Emergency Call Centre for Users of the Southern Express Highway

1984 National Authority for the Control of Dangerous drugs – advice regarding rehabilitation of users of such drugs

1991 Complaints regarding environment and natural resources.

Disaster Management

In our life time we will have to face a hazard or a disaster anytime, anywhere. Our day-to-day lives can become ad hoc due to disasters and accidents. Therefore, we must always be vigilant about the possibility of an accident or a disaster. We should be informed and aware of accidents and disasters.

For free distribution79

Although it is difficult to prevent accidents and disasters completely, we should have an instinct to identify them early. Therefore, we must always be aware of what is happening around us. Though it is difficult to prevent disasters completely, we can minimize the damages caused by disasters. This process is known as disaster management.

Although it is difficult to prevent disasters completely, damages caused by disasters can be minimized. This process is known as disaster management.

Different types of hazards

Let us identify accidents and disasters that can take place in places we inhabit most. The illustrations given below will help us to identify some of them:

Thunderbolt kills a university student

Regular earth slides block hilly areas

An earth slip

80For free distribution

20% of acreage of the country at the risk of land slides

Daughter falls into the ditchDead and the dead body emerged from the Mahaweli River

Shoe factory on fire remaining only ash

It is difficult to identify an exact place where accidents and disasters can occur.

However, accidents can happen in some of the places listed below.:

*Home *Work site *Armoury

*School *Road *Reservoirs

*Surrounding *Factory *Rivers

Accidents and disasters can happen at any time of a day. However, we cannot delay or ignore our work thinking that accidents are waiting to happen. Since accidents and disasters around us are likely to happen at any time, we must be vigilant, aware and act diligently.

For free distribution81

Accident prone occasions

A large number of people and properties are destroyed as a result of a devastating landslide in Aranayake - Kegalle (18.05.2016)

Run over by a stone crusher, a student dies

Kosgama - Salawa Armoury destroyed due to a fire. People in an area of 6 km are re-located. (05.06.2016)

Destruction caused by the explosion of the armoury in Salawa, Kosgama

You may have either heard about or read the above headlines and reports. Perhaps, you too may have faced similar situations. This type of unexpected accidents can occur even at school. News is published in newspapers to make students and people aware of these disasters.

We also use different types of fireworks in our homes on festive occasions such as Sinhala - Hindu New Year and Christmas. Careless use of these items can cause a lot of physical damages to us. Use of electricity should also be done carefully on different festive occasions.

The use of electricity on different occasions must be done with great caution and care. In homes, where there are little children, plug points should be kept out of their reach.

Different kinds of drugs, hot materials like cooking utensils, hot drinks, electrical items and fragile things should be kept away from the reach of little children. Those who live in flats should be more concerned and take greater care to protect children. The danger of accidents caused by lightening is high on rainy days. We should not use mobile phones, electrical items, etc, on such occasions.

82For free distribution

An occasion that shows the intensity of human-elephant conflict

A dog biting a man

Similarly we need to be concerned about harm from animals, especially from serpents. There is a gradual increase in the numbers of people dying due to snake bites. It is important to be observant and watchful especially when walking around in the night. Attacks from elephants and dog bites are frequently reported. The human-elephant conflict is acute nowadays. Many deaths are reported often from this conflict. Therefore, it is advisable for those who live in the conflict areas to be informed about ways and means to avoid this conflict.

Activity

²Analyze the accidents shown in newspaper extracts as shown in “Different types of accidents.” Follow the guidelines given.

Related to home : ..................................................................... Related to school : .....................................................................Environment related : .....................................................................Workplace related : .....................................................................Others : .....................................................................

²Use electronic and print media to find other such accidents and include them in the analysis above.

²Explain the reasons for the human-elephant conflict to be so acute at present.

For free distribution83

Food and drug related accidents

Food poisoning made several boarded girls to be hospitalized

A student sacrifices life for a roll

Soft drinks bring death to two children

Food poisoning made

several boarded girls to

be hospitalized

A student sacrifices life

for a roll

Soft drinks bring death

to two children

²It is also important to pay attention to hazards that take place due to of food and drugs too.

Newspapers report instances in which people have died of food poisoning.

◦Failure to wash and clean properly all items of food.

◦Consumption of outdated food items

◦Consuming half cooked food.

◦Measures adopted by sellers at different stages (ripening fruit, use of chemicals for storage)

Food poisoning can result in any of the points listed above. The consumption of processed food instead of natural food may also cause different allergies and other health hazards. Deviating from natural food and consuming instant food often, can also lead to unnecessary allergies.

Hazards can also take place due to improper storage of dangerous drugs, and pesticides. At homes, drugs should be kept out of reach of children. Accidents can be prevented by making sure of only the prescribed dosage of drugs is given to elderly persons and children by a responsible adult.

Instructions for proper use of drugs

” Follow relevant medical advice

” Use the prescribed dosage

” Use drugs at the proper time

” Be aware of expiry date

” Store drugs under correct temperature

” Be aware of instructions in the label before use

” Avoid use of harmful drugs.

84For free distribution

Accidents and disasters take place due to bad habits and behaviours too.

e.g.- ² Driving after liquor

²Driving under the effect of bad impulses and emotions (anger, sadness, depression, extreme happiness)

²Using mobile phones while driving

²Smoking and use of narcotics

The numbers of accidents taking place due to these reasons keep increasing day by day. We must remain wise to minimize the numbers of such accidents.

Hospital/Accident Service

Police

Air force, Infantry and Navy

Fire brigade

Centre for Disaster Management

St. John’s Ambulance Service

Health services

Media network

(Television/ Radio/ Newspapers)

Red Cross Society

Institutes associated with accidents and disasters

When an accident or a disaster takes place, it is important to act consciously and confidently without being in a hurry. On most such occasions people gather just to see the disasters.

Example: an accident

In an accident we must give our support to take the injured people to hospitals and help Police with their legal matters. If people gather unnecessarily it could be a disturbance.

For free distribution85

Disasters and accidents caused by human activities and by natural causes may not end up at once. They can occur as a chain of incidents.

e.g. :- A Tsunami, A landslide, a fire in an armoury, a bomb blast, On such an occasion those who merely visit such places can face the same accident. Therefore, we must refrain from gathering in such places unnecessarily. It is also necessary to be aware of media reports to avoid chain accidents. Paying attention to weather reports, being aware of changes in natural surroundings and taking immediate action in the event of a landslide are all helpful to minimize damages. It is also important to pay attention to the behaviours of animals because they have a better instinct to identify the changes in the natural environment than humans. Our ancestors paid their serious attention to the sounds of frogs, emergence of grown and winged termites, the flying pattern of swallows etc. Accordingly, in the event of a natural disaster, they were able to help themselves immediately and others with minimum casualties. It is essential that we develop ourselves for instant action and make correct decisions to suit the occasion. Such timely and necessary action taken consciously and intelligently will not only help avoid accidents or damages but also help with quick management of a disastrous situation. This will also contribute towards safeguarding lives and property and helping sound lives towards a developed country with a sound and strong economy.Disasters due to human activities

Road accidentsHave you listened to this song frequently relays on SLBC?

When you take the wheel

Do not fly.

Follow road signs

Observe road rules.

Carelessness of drivers causes fatal accidents.

The departed,

Leave sorrow behind,

Remained become helpless throughout life.

Take the wheel – go on the journey

Do not be in a hurry.

Save others

Save yourself

Take care!

A fatal accident

Improper crossing of a roadSing this song, together with your teacher.

86For free distribution

A dreadful road accident

Accidents on roads are identified as the most common disaster today. Many lives are lost daily due to accidents. According to media reports, many lives are also made to suffer serious injuries. Road accidents take away many valuable human lives that can otherwise be of great help to society. Such a loss affects development of the country directly. At the same time, society faces a great responsibility to social welfare of the disabled.

Road accidents in Sri Lanka 2010 - 2015

Information regarding road accidents in Sri Lanka

(2010 - 2015)No. of deathsOtherMinor accidentsSevere accidentsFatal accidentsYear

272116390125606124257520102677175891319669652498201124491793014680720923172012236513294135256870219020132440138541278470712260201428011351413095771925902015

Source : Police Automobile Headquarters - 2015

Annual No. of deaths due to road accidents

For free distribution87

According to the above data, the victims of such road accidents may be people who left their homes for jobs, for education and for other needs. Therefore, it is time for us to pay serious attention towards prevention of road accidents.

Do you know ? In 2014, road accidents within a day caused the following results:

²Accidents caused by vehicles 101

²Casualties 54

²Loss 20 billion rupees

²Deaths caused 7

²Damage to property 38

Primary causes for road accidents are as follows:

²Faults made by drivers

²Faults made by pedestrians

²Improper roads

²Defective condition of vehicles

Faults occurred by mechanical faults and human faults

Due to mechanical faults

15%

Due to human faults

85%

An incident of using a mobile phone while driving

About 85% of road accidents have occurred due to the mishaps of man. A look at the pie chart confirms this fact.

Faults made by drivers:

²Indiscipline

²Driving after liquor

²Driving with no valid licence

²Failure to follow road signs and signals or instructions of the Traffic Police officers

²Driving at high speed

²Driving under heavy fatigue

²Not being alert on other vehicles and pedestrians, when driving vehicles

88For free distribution

²Not paying attention to weather conditions.

eg. - Misty weather condition

²Using mobile phones while driving

²Carrying an excess number of passengers

²Competition among drivers

²Different mental conditions of drivers

²Ignorance of road rules.

An incident of crossing the road while using hand phones

Faults made by pedestrians

Carelessness of pedestrians also contributes to most road accidents. Following are the faults common to pedestrians.

²Ignorance of road signs and road rules

²Refusing to walk on the right of the road

²Walking in groups

²Refusal to use zebra crossing when crossing the road

²Using mobile phones while walking

²Wearing dark colour clothes at night

In using bicycles for riding

²Riding bicycles in groups

²Riding at night without head lights

²Absence of red coloured reflectors at the back of bicycles.

Many riders face accidents because of the reasons given above.

For free distribution89

Conditions of roads

Poor conditions on roads are also a reason for many road accidents.

²Potholes on roads filled with water

²Patches of oil on roads

²Dangerous bends

²Wet and slippery roads

²Incomplete road repairs

²Huge trees close to roads

²Absence of white lines and dotted lines

² Absence of road signs where necessary

²Traffic congestion on roads.

Condition of vehicles

Road accidents have also increased due to poor conditions of vehicles.

Some such conditions are as follows:

²Poorly lit headlights or no headlights at all

² Improper functioning of brake systems

² Driving on rainy days without wipers

²Use of worn out tyres and poor maintenance of vehicles

²Driving without signal lights

²Driving, using improper engine conditions

²Driving without using reflectors

90For free distribution

Actions to avoid road accidents

The most important way to avoid road accidents is to follow road rules carefully by both the drivers and the pedestrians.

Observe the following road signs carefully.

Road signs that are important for our day-to-day life

Road accidents can be minimized if drivers, riders and pedestrians pay careful attention to these road signs. You may be either a passenger in a bus, or a motor car or a pedestrian walking on the road. Wherever you are, observe carefully the road you take.

The government spends heavily to safeguard drivers and pedestrians displaying road signs and fixing CCTV cameras. Using these measures, the government tries to ensure our safety on roads. Therefore, it is the duty of a disciplined driver to follow these road signs and rules and avoid unnecessary accidents on roads.

For free distribution91

Responsibilities towards prevention of road accidents

Police responsibilitiesResponsibility of the government Responsibilities of driversMake drivers and pedestrians aware of road rules

Maintain proper repairs to roads Follow road rules necessarily

Abandon the use of dilapidated vehiclesMaintain effective driver trainingFollow road signs

Mark speed limits and signs on either side of roadDo not drive under the influence of liquorDraw up programmes for the special attention of drivers

Avoid excessive speed

Maintain vehicles in useDrive carefully in adverse weather conditionsProper use of headlight and dim light Use safety belts Motor cyclists to use helmets with chin guards

Train accidents

Train accidents have also become a main type of accident in present Sri Lanka. The number of victims to die from train accidents has increased rapidly. Main causes for train accidents are as follows:

A fatal train accident

²walking on railway tracks ²driving across railway tracks, neglecting signals.

²technical faults in railways

²absence of gates at railway crossings

²living recklessly on either side of railway track.

92For free distribution

Ways to avoid railway accidents

²Ban travelling on footboard for passengers on trains

²Keep away from railway tracks

²Refrain from getting in or out of a running train

²Activate railway signals properly

²Repair and maintain railroads regularly

²Ensure proper and active use of safety gates across railways

²Railway control rooms to be vigilant about proper functioning of signals

In case of a road or train accident

In case of a road or a train accident several parties need to share heavy responsibilities. The parties are:

²drivers

²ordinary people

²the police

Lives of people can be saved through unity, co-operation and quick action of everyone mentioned above. Therefore, when an accident occurs:

²rush the injured to hospitals

²inform the nearest police station as soon as possible

²prevent unnecessary violence that can take place

²collect money and other belongings of victims and hand them over to security officers or owners.

Listed above are the duties of responsible and law-abiding citizens in such situations.

For free distribution93

Activities

²Many road accidents are a common feature in Sri Lanka today. Mention the possible reasons for this.

²Write four suggestions you wish to forward for the prevention of road accidents.

²Look at the road signs given as A, B, C, D given below. Write what they refer to.

ABCD

Hazards that occur due to use of chemical substances

Different chemical substances are widely in use today for our domestic needs. Chemicals are used for crop cultivation, in factories and for production purposes. As students, there are times for you to use chemicals in school laboratories for experiment.

Incorrect and careless use of chemicals can cause harm to our health and even death.

Given below is a Table showing statistics related to hazards caused to people by poisoning with chemical pesticides.

2005 2004 Cause for accident No. deathNo. hospitalized No. deathNo. hospitalized

127016910128116644Poisoning pesticides

2301745622616978

Poisoning chemicals used at home

Sauce : Reports of medical statistics

94For free distribution

When chemicals are used

To destroy insects

For agricultural purposes

As raw materials in factories

For sanitary purposes (detergents)

Home gardens

Laboratories in schools

Probable accidents by using chemicals

²Insecure storage

²Storage alongside food items

²Storing without proper display of labels

²Keeping chemicals within easy reach of children.

²Not following given instructions regarding the use (wearing gloves, helmets, face masks, slippers, etc.)

²Not using the proper dilution as recommended.

²Throwing empty or half empty bottles into water ways.

²Using water ways to wash machines used for spraying agrochemicals and pesticides

Have you thought about this?

Ways how chemicals can enter the body through:

²Contact with the skin

²Inhalation

²Through month

²Contact with eyes

²Open wounds in the body

²Careless use of fuel pipelines

²Through Food (e.g. - glyphosate)

For free distribution95

Steps to be taken when a chemical accident takes place

The following steps should be followed in case a chemical substance enters one’s body,

²Identify the reason for the accident

²Give necessary first aid

²Direct the victim to a doctor immediately

²If available, submit the containers, wrappings of the poison or chemical to the doctor.

If the identified poison, containers or wrappers can be submitted to the doctor, it will be helpful to start proper treatment. A patient who has inhaled poison must be removed from the poisonous environment immediately. Proper ventilation and several washes with cold water, need to be given. It is proper if the patient is immediately directed to a doctor.

Steps to be taken to prevent accidents caused by chemicals

Using protective garments when using pesticides

Poison symbol implying danger

Numbers of accidents caused by chemicals necessity keep increasing day by day. Therefore, it is a timely necessity to avoid such accidents. Measures to be taken to prevent such accidents are as follows:

²Safe storage ²Careful reading and following instructions on the label before using and acting accordingly ²Storing away from the reach of children ²Storing to display the symbol of poison clearly ²Following the given instructions thoroughly and correctly when mixing or diluting ²Using gloves, masks and boots etc. according to instructions ²Buying only the required amount ²Refraining from keeping empty bottles in homes after use ²Refraining from throwing away haphazardly empty bottles and other containers to reservoirs and to the environment, after use.

96For free distribution

Activity

 Mention the harm caused to man and the environment in the use of pesticides. Day by day, there is an increase in destruction and accidents caused by the use of chemicals. Prepare a list of activities to minimize such destruction and harm. Mention the traditional methods used by our ancestors on their crop cultivations, instead of chemicals and pesticides,.

Affordable lifestyles and sustainable development

With development, the modern world faces many differences. It is no secret that the industrial revolution has directly influenced these changes. The industrial revolution has affected the environment at a greater scale. Man has shown more attention to his requirements as against the law of nature. Accordingly, natural resources are fast decreasing all over the world. Sri Lanka also faces this problem.

In the past, life styles in our country were directly linked with national culture and sustainable development. You may have heard that our ancestors never depleted existing stocks but used them carefully preserving for future use. This means that they used only the necessary quantities. Our culture is complete with many examples in children’s literature of poetry, song and verse used by our ancestors regarding use and preservation of natural resources. One such example of lyrics for children, is translated as follows:

This song we sang in our childhood symbolizes the concept of sustainable development.

fï .fia fndfydameKs fodvï ;sfímeys, bÈ, - ìug keñ,nr fj,d w;+kx.sghs ughsf.ä folla we;Sjeäh lvk krl <fuda fyu fkdfõ wmS

On this treeThere are many sweet oranges.Mature and ripeThe branches are heavily laden with ripe fruit.My sister and INeed only two orangesWe are not bad children,to pick more than two.

For free distribution97

Affordable life styles and awareness of use

The needs of modern man are very complex. But the resources available to fulfill these needs are limited. Besides, it is the responsibility of the modern generation to leave behind resources for future generations too. Therefore, we must all get used to affordable life styles which mean to follow a life style and consumption style to match one's own economic level. Our ancestors invariably used to an affordable or simple lifestyles and consumption patterns. They were greatly satisfied with their basic needs: food, shelter and clothing. They used very simple tools with their everyday activities. Yet, the world went through timely changes and our ancestors too had to fall in line. Then, they had to make adjustments to suit their lifestyles. However, such adjustments brought no harmful changes to their lifestyle, society, environment or culture.

Cycling to work place

Bicycle : eco-friendly and economic family vehicle

In addition to the basic needs, our parents and grand parents used bicycles, two-wheeled tractors and made economical use of firewood with their hearths. The bicycle came to be the most friendly to the family. The bicycle was used for both travelling and the transport of goods. Even the most developed countries in the world still use the bicycle as an environmental friendly means of transport. Japan is a good example in this connection.

The Japanese use a bicycle to attend to most of their needs. The bicycle is widely used in Japan. Using a bicycle does not show or imply any social discrimination.

The two wheeled tractor is an environmentally friendly equipment used by man. It was very helpful for agricultural purposes. The two wheeled tractor that was used for both travelling and agricultural purposes was a very useful equipment in the past.

98For free distribution

Tractor : for ploughing fields and transporting goods

Sustainable Development

"Sustainable use is the use of available natural resources by the present generation while preserving for the use of future generation"

Man has many needs. Among his needs,

• food, clothing and shelter

• water and electricity

• power supply

• travel requirements

• educational requirements

• relaxation and entertainment

• health and sanitary requirements etc. are of much importance

Therefore, a nation has to make it a habit to follow an affordable lifestyle to avoid being a burden to self, the society or the country. Through that, by contributing to the sustainable development they get the ability to fulfil their duties as citizens.

All of us need to contribute towards sustainable development. To do so, it is important to pay our attention to the following facts.

For free distribution99

³ Refrain from over consumption of resources

³ Adopt an environmentally-friendly life style

³ Adapt to existing rules and regulations

³ Dispose of garbage appropriately

³ Protect natural resources

³ Make economical use of natural resources

³ Preserve energy

³ Adopt environmentally friendly alternative sources of energy

³ Use environmentally friendly goods and services

³ Always act as responsible citizens.

Disposal of garbage improperlyDisposal of garbage properly

Always dispose ofyour garbage in thecorrect containers.Never throw awayrubbish in the streets or near bygullies.Always look for the correct waste bin.

Disposal of GarbageProperly

100For free distribution

Recycling of waste matter

Man, nowadays, faces many types of illnesses due to the failure to follow these facts. Meanwhile, these days there are “deadly diseases’ identified among villagers and discussed in common. They are:

• Kidney ailments

• Dengue fever and the mosquito menace

The two ailments listed above have claimed many lives. The general opinion now, is, that glyphosate used for agricultural purposes, is the cause for kidney ailments. Similarly, we have to accept that improper disposal of waste material is a cause for the spread of dengue and the the mosquito menace.

Both the state and the society have a great responsibility to eliminate these diseases. To protect future generation, we have to get together and carry out our duties responsibly. We also need to adopt and adapt to an affordable lifestyle and an affordable consumption style. This way, it will be possible to strengthen sustainable development in Sri Lanka.

Our ancestors never put themselves first. They always thought about future generation. Therefore, even if they did not get things, they felt that those to be born in the future, needed to be provided for. They believed they could make use, while preserving for future. An example for this belief is a poem compiled by Tibetan monk Venerable S. Mahinda thero, titled ''Yuthukame Agaya'', ‘The Value of Duty’

For free distribution101

The Value of Duty

Child: What are you doing grandpa?

Why are you digging the garden?

Grandpa: I don’t think you cannot see

I am digging to plant a mango seed.

Child: You take great pains to plant a seed today

Will you get even one mango fruit to eat?

Grandpa: I don’t expect a mango from this tree

I am only doing my duty

Child: If you cannot get the benefits

I don’t understand why you should do this

Grandpa: I am surprised at your thoughts

If you grow up in this manner, you will be blamed

We are now eating the fruit from

Trees planted by our grand parents

We need to keep for those to follow

It is our duty.

Child: I now realize the value of my duty

Good bye, grandpa, I am leaving.

102For free distribution

In a book compiled by Robert Knox titled “A Historical Relation of the Island Ceylon”, he refers to our ancestors as a nation most anxious to fulfil our responsibilities. Therefore, from our youth we need to get used to fulfilling our duties and responsibilities. We need to do so adapting ourselves to an affordable lifestyle to suit an ever changing world. Such efforts will help us build a strong nation aimed at sustainable development.

Activity

² Mention how you can contribute towards sustainable development.

² Give examples to prove how our ancestors met their everyday needs, keeping to sustainable development.

² Collect information from the Internet on how helpful “The bicycle and the hand tractor” are and compile a booklet on the topic.

² With the assistance of your adults and the home science teacher prepare a list of nourishing food items for use with a nourishing meal.

For free distribution103

Summary

 Man has to endure natural disasters in his/her lifetime.

 Man’s actions have contributed heavily towards damage caused by natural disasters.

 Society needs to identify the causes for natural disasters and take effective control measures to avoid such disasters.

 Accidents are waiting to happen, anytime, anywhere, in one’s life.

 It is not possible to completely eradicate accidents or disasters.

 Awareness of disasters or accidents can minimize or avoid accidents.

 It is the duty of a responsible citizen to act wisely in case of an accident.

 Being aware of damage and disastrous situations and assisting with disaster management can easily contribute to sustainable development.

 Today, there is an increase in accidents caused by drugs and chemicals.

 Road accidents and drug related accidents are both caused by man. Awareness can easily help control the harm caused by both drugs and chemicals.

 It is the duty of all responsible people to actively help victims in the event of a disaster.

104For free distribution

05

Let’s Overcome Challenges by Solving Problems

Introduction

A person has to face various challenges and problems in his personal life as well as in social life. It is important to develop necessary strength in persons to face them successfully.

By studying this chapter, it is expected;

²to identify the weaknesses in ability to face challenges and problems in the children in present society

²to develop the necessary strengths in students to find correct decisions and win the challenges through creative alternatives found by identifying the problems correctly and analyzing them.

The basic process that can be seen in nature is that birth, existence and death of everything. This theory is common to all living and non-living things of this world. Problems and challenges are also the same. Problems are something relative. Something that may become a problem to one may not be a problem to another. For an example, though crossing a river is a problem to a rabbit, it is not a problem to a tortoise. Yet, running with a rabbit is a problem to a tortoise. In the same manner, while running fast becomes a problem to a tortoise, it is not a problem to a rabbit. Accordingly, a problem may be relative to person and situation.

For free distribution105

A problem can be defined as a barrier or an obstacle that blocks reaching a certain activity, condition or situation. It can be defined simply, as the gap between the situation of any moment and inability to achieve one's expectations as precise as one expected.

Accordingly, while problems are a normal phenomenon in human life, problems are always formed, since your expectations cannot be achieved as much as you expect.

Physical problems

Mental ProblemsAnatomical Problems

Social ProblemsEconomic problems

Environmental ProblemsTechnical Problems

Different types of problems

Such problems occur frequently in your private life, school life, social life, family activities, social activities as well as in professional activities. It occurs as such, since we attempt to find solutions without having proper understanding and identification of problems. Though we get temporary solutions through this, it is not a correct solution to the problem. Thus, occurrence of such a number of problems has become a general phenomenon. Due to unquenchable desires and unlimited expectations in people, problems occur frequently. Since people suffer from problems throughout their lives, it is of utmost importance to help them to get those problems solved.

Examples of some problems faced by students

² Problems of food and nutrition

² Absence of things one likes

² Loss of security and protection

² Scarcity of resources in some schools

106For free distribution

² Economic difficulties

² Failure in examinations

² Loss of love

²Mental pressure caused by the school environment

²Lack of time for sports or leisure

²Having to face examinations competitively

Finding causes for problems

When finding solutions to a problem that has arisen, it is important to find the causes of it. Most of the problems arise due to personal behaviour, personal reactions and personal activities. When finding causes for problems, they can be revealed by analyzing them as shown in the following diagram,

Problem

Reasons for the problem

Influence of the problem

Poor achievements in subjectFailing Examinations

Fear of examinations

Not prepared to learn

Not engaging in exercises

Laziness and lack of dedication

Engaging in improper activities

Less attentive in listening to lessons

Not doing studies

Poor attendance

Lack of knowledge on subject matter

Accordingly, by revealing the causes for a problem, solutions can be found easily. When causes of a problem are identified, attention can be focussed on alternative solutions too. While there may be several alternative solutions for a problem, it is important to select the best solution out of them.

For free distribution107

In the present society, where a problem arises, some people fear, evade, avoid or take revenge on life. It has become a common feature of reaching to a problem, though it is wrong. This is due to hypersensitivity and facing it uncritically. Hence, when a problem arises, it is important to work creatively with good reasoning, using alternative methods to achieve correct solutions. Then, influences of the problem also can be mitigated.

Mitigation of problems

Being accurate

Development of co-operation

Development of cordiality

Restoring peace

Eradication of stress

Achievement of objectives

Benefits of solving problems

Finding solutions to problems

It is extremely important to find solutions to get rid of a problem. When finding solutions to a problem, it is of utmost importance to have a good understanding and a realization of it. By that, suitable solutions can be achieved.

For example, the steps that could be used to solve the problem of being weak in your subject achievement can be presented as follows;

108For free distribution

Daily attendance to school

Attending with preparation for learning process

Active participation in lesson

Getting clarified the unclear subject matter

Working with dedication

Refraining from unsuitable activities

Studying while recollecting the lessons learnt

Engaging in revision exercises

Facing examinations without fear

When solving a problem, it is important to analyse it creatively and critically.

Activity

²Choose a problem that you or one of your friends face and identify the causes of it. ²State the identified causes as shown in the above diagram. ²Explain the alternative solutions that can be used to solve that problem.

Let’s overcome challenges

Encountering various difficulties in life are challenges

Various barriers that occur when winning the targets in life are challenges

For free distribution109

Why do we get challenges in sports too?

Examination is also a challenge for us

Alleviation of poverty is also a challenge

Winning nature too is a challenge for us

What you all mentioned here is totally correct. By facing these conditions successfully, all challenges could be overcome.

That means challenges occur in various situations

Patience

Endeavour

Determination

Enthusiasm

Dedication

Adaptation

Interest

Self

confidence

Need to overcome challenges

110For free distribution

Nick Vujicic who won challenges

The following pictures show how Mr. Nick who was totally disabled by birth won his life.

The following is a life story of a pupil of who won challenges:

Pushpakumara Ranukge, a certain courageous boy, who was born in a very beautiful village called Kamburupitiya faced an unfortunate accident when he was three years old. While he was walking along the mountain located behind his house where rubber trees were being cut, he lost his leg due to a sudden falling of a rubber tree. Though he lost a leg, he did not repent over it. From his childhood, he had a strong determination to be a useful citizen after completing his studies successfully. So, with the determination of empowering his family and looking after his parents, he attended school daily on clutches walking around six miles, carrying his school bag. He who was a popular student in the village as well as in school won the entrance to a university. He was a clever orator as well as a clever leader. He won a number of victories in sports which were held for the differently abled. Once he climbed “Sigiriya” too. After joining the government service as a graduate, he became a leader of a trade union. While engaging in his duties well, he became a totally successful person facing the challenges morally, forgetting his unfortunate incident.

For free distribution111

Challenges faced in day-to-day life

 Making education successful amidst economic difficulties

 Passing examinations

 Winning the targets facing failures successfully

 Winning the goals in life

 Winning the barriers

 Correcting errors

 Maintenance of a beautiful environment

 Maintenance of co-existence free from conflicts

As mentioned above, we will have to face various challenges in social life as well as in personal life. Therefore, it is important to face a challenge by being a challenge to the challenge successfully without fleeing from it.

Reacting in a positive way in problematic and challenging situations

"I have not failed. I have just found ten thousand ways that won’t work.”

The above statement was the answer given by Thomas Alva Edison to one of his friends when he asked whether he was going to commit 10 000 wrongs in the invention of electric bulb when even the 9999th attempt proved no success. What becomes vividly clear through this is that most successful personalities ignore mistakes and regard them as blessings to win their challenges.

112For free distribution

Activity

² Create a story collecting information about such a personality lived or living in our society who won the life facing such challenges.² Explain the good ideas that can be obtained from it. ² Identify several challenges you will have to face in your day-to-day (in school or in your family) life.² Suggest the ways of facing one of them successfully.

Self awareness

Controlling emotions

Problem solving

Making correct decisions

Critical thinkingCreative thinking

Inter-personal relationships

Kindness, compassion

Psycho-social relationships to be promoted to overcome challenges

Effective communication

Accordingly, to win challenges, it is important to develop a good mentality from the childhood. Specially, psycho-social competencies must be developed. By improving these qualities, your personality too can be enhanced. When these qualities are improved the power of facing challenges too gets developed.

Facing various problems and challenges in life successfully

Using different methods to overcome various problems and challenges, creative methods are very important. Some problems and challenges may occur at certain situations. Following creative methods on such occasions is of utmost importance. All inventions and discoveries of man are the results of various challenges. All the attempts, from the discovery of fire to the inventions of high tech productions and lunar voyage are the results of serious challenges.

For free distribution113

The following pictures show the creation discoveries made by man to win challenges.

Honda Who Won Challenges

The creative mind of Soichiro Honda who was born in 1906 in Japan, provided transport facilities to the people in Japan when Japan was completely destroyed in World War II. Though Honda experienced thousands of sufferings, barriers, and drawbacks when whole Japan was challenged, he came forward winning them all, due to strength of winning challenges embedded in his mind. Not only Japan itself, but the world at large was also benefitted by his useful creation.

114For free distribution

Where there is a problem, there is a solution

Problems, most probably, are created by the external behaviour of man. Problems occur as you cannot perform your duties well. When you work without a goal or target, it becomes unsuccessful as it possesses no strong foundation. Problems could be solved successfully, by resolving to take something towards the correct path, without letting it occur automatically. There may be not only one solution but also many solutions for a problem.

Some people suffer, being unable to solve their problems as they do not see the problem in a wide angle. By observing different angles of a problem alternative solutions can be adopted.

For example,

²should a child who suffers from severe economic difficulties stop his education half way?

²should the money earned by doing some work be spent on education?

²if not, should he seek a job, leaving school?

²should he get his needs fulfilled, by meeting persons or institutions that wish to offer help?

In the same way, attention can be focussed on various alternatives to solve any problem. There are various solutions for any problem or for a challenge. The challenges are not pleasant experiences: they may be extremely difficult too. When you face them strongly, success can be achieved easily.

Susanthika Jayasinghe, who is one of the greatest athletes in Sri Lanka, won her target through extremely difficult training and dedication. Participating in Olympic Games then, might have been only a dream to her as she was born and educated amidst-economic difficulties in a difficult area in Sri Lanka. Yet, possibility of overcoming any challenge, is well depicted if there are goals, determination and dedication like Susanthika's victory in Olympics.

Man has to face various challenges frequently in his day-to-day activities. Fleeing, avoiding, and fearing in those challenges will damage private personality as well as social personality of a person.

For free distribution115

If there is a will there is a way. There is nothing one cannot overcome if one has a strong will. Words like ''no'' ''cannot'' etc. should not be used frequently. If one becomes a slave to them, the concept of ‘’I cannot’’ will be embedded in his/her mind with negative thoughts.

Hence, in winning challenges, the confidence that “I Can” is very important. For example, more than 50% of our school children fail annually in Mathematics and in English. Most of the children who fail, cultivate the negative concepts like “very difficult”, “I cannot “, “I cannot remember”, “ I cannot do maths”, “ I can’t speak English” and as they engross in these thoughts frequently and continuously, they are subjected to fail examinations eventually. Yet, they foster positive thoughts, like “ I can do maths well” or “ I can speak English fluently”, to eradicate the overcoming negative thoughts, the challenge of examinations is positive. Accordingly, it is clear that, there are solutions to win any problem or challenge.

Activity

² Suggest alternative solutions, selecting a problem you have to face frequently.

² Make positive statements, removing negative thoughts like “No”, “Can’t” fostering the positive thoughts, like “I can do well”

The way of using problems and challenges to make life a success

Developing mental courage

Generating various creations

Using the ability for correcting mistakes

Obtaining advisory services for alterative solutions

Fostering the strength continuously to achieve a certain goal

When it is difficult to find solutions at personal level

Innovations

Identification of problems in personal or social behaviour

116For free distribution

Activity

 Complete the following table, associating the creations produced by man to win various problems and challenges.

Problem/ ChallengeCreation invented Louis Braille lost his eye sight at the age of 15 by an accidentBraille system of reading and writing

Activity

 Associating information and reports in newspapers, discuss the ways of freeing school children who are subjected to various problems and challenges.

Summary

 The gap between the condition that exists at any moment and the inability to achieve your target as expected, can simply be defined as problems

 Various types of problems

 Finding causes for problems

 When solving a problem, it is important to act critically and creatively, after analyzing it

 Various barriers that occur when winning the goals in life are known as challenges

 Facing various problems and challenges in life successfully

 There are solutions to any problem or challenge

 How the problems and challenges could be used to make life a success

For free distribution117

06

Let Us Enter the Worldof Work

Introduction

At present, education has become a major factor that influences a person’s life. The reason is that, it is expected to enrich competencies of a person and prepare him/her for a future profession through education.

After studying this chapter, you will be able to understand the following:

²Various definitions regarding the world of work

²Importance of working with dignity of labour

²Value of skilled labour

²Characteristics of a good labourer

²That every employment is important for the social upliftment

—I like to do the job I wish to. I do not expect money alone from the job. I like to serve society and learn new things in doing jobs. Today, education is one of the evident factors that influences a life of a person. ˜

Given above is the answer given by a student of Grade 8, when he was asked about the job he likes. What does it mean? There are three objectives to be fulfilled from a job. Can you identify them?

What would be your answer if I ask you the job you expect to do in future?

118For free distribution

Some answers given in common can be listed as follows:

A teacher

A nurse

A solider

A pilot

A lady doctor

An engineer

A lawyer

A clerk A businessman

Ask your friends about the jobs they prefer and list them as shown above. You will notice that very few friends have chosen laborious jobs like farmer, labourer, technician, etc. But, these are important jobs, providing services to the society. Although there are various professions in the society, majority prefer employment with high social recognition. Yet, every employment is equally important to the society. The most important factor is the service rendered to the society, regardless of income earned or social recognition. Let us learn from this lesson more about occupations from which we could serve the society.

For free distribution119

World of work and its variations

Man has to work for a living. Teichler (1999) has defined the world of work as the relationship among the real activities, a person performs daily relevant to his profession.

The following are some definitions about the world of work.

''The world of work is the chances of those who are already occupied or expect to be occupied'' (Rooney, 2001)

''Employment opportunities available or people can join in relevant fields in farms and industries''

(Soanes, 2004)

It is clear from the above ideas that all employment opportunities available in the society can be taken as the world of work. Can you prepare a list of different fields of employment and employment opportunities that exist in society? Observe the following chart as an example. See whether you can expand it. You will need to search for different jobs available in the society.

Agricultural• Farming• Fisheries industry• Plucking tea• Labour• Tapping rubber• Processing Copra

Services• Transport • Postal • Health • Trade• Communication• Water Supply

Self-employment• Beauty culture• Small scale enterprises• Tailoring• Selling ornamental plants• Food processing• Repairing electric/electrical items

Technical• Repairing automobiles • Mechanical work• Repairing TV, Computers etc.• Computer data processing• Air traffic control

Different employment opportunities in the world of work

120For free distribution

It will be clear to you that, there are many occupations as well as many occupants in the above fields. Even when we consider one institute, we can see that there may be various job opportunities in it.

Machine operators in a garmentfactory

In a garment factory, many are employed as: managers, clerks, technicians, security personnel, canteen workers, electricians, plumbers, foremen, drivers, transport helpers, quality controllers, etc. in addition to the machine operators.

To provide a better service from an institution, all workers must work efficiently.

It is clear that there is a variety in —the world of work. ˜ Let us identify the factors which contribute to these variations.

 Varieties at regional level and resources

Some occupations in Sri Lanka are identified as special to particular regions.

²Nuwara Eliya - Vegetable and Flower cultivation

²Galle, Matara - Fishing Industry

²Anuradhapura - Paddy Cultivation

²Weweldeniya - Rattan Industry

²Kajugama - Trade in Cashew

²Rathnapura - Gem Industry

Rattan Industry

For free distribution121

 Traditional occupations also exist in the world of work

Traditional occupations

²Pilimatalawe - Brass industry

²Ambalangoda - Masks and puppets

²Molagoda - Clay products

 Field of occupation

Occupations in the current world of work can be divided into three main fields as:

I Government and Semi Government sector

II Private sector

III Self employment

 According to the contribution of labour

There is another classification of occupations in the world of work based on the type of labour employed.

I Occupations that require more mental labour

(Doctors, Engineers, Teachers, Administrators)

II Occupations that require more physical labour

(Farmers, Labourers, Sanitary workers, Carpenters, Masons, porters etc.)

According to the above examples, it is clear that the world of work refers to all sectors that supply services and work necessary for our existence. It is clear that there are differences in the world of work and that these differences are carefully considered, when selecting a job.

The following conversation helps you learn more about the world of work.

Marks

Engineers

Farmers

122For free distribution

Sunil - If a payment is done for something we are doing, I think, we can call it a job.

Namali - But, there are jobs that are not paid, aren’t there? See, the work a mother does at home. She is not paid for it?

Menali - Yeah, the learning we do in school. It is also not paid for. My grandfather is a retired teacher. He is working in an Elders' Home now for no pay. It is called voluntary service.

Namali - There are various jobs. They can be named as employment and self employment.

Sunil - Some people talk about blue collar jobs and white collar jobs. What are they?

Menali - They are classified according to the occupation done. Working in factories, masonry, etc. are called blue collar jobs.

Namali - Yes, I too have heard about it. White collar workers are found in offices or in the field of administration. They do white collar jobs.

Sunil - The workers that perform manual labour are called blue collar jobs, aren't they? They work in production.

Menali - Yeah, but occupations can also be categorized as mental and physical jobs too.

Activity

²List out the occupations available in your area and rearrange them according to your preference.

Let us work with dignity of labour

Farmers busy in the field

Labour is mainly divided as physical and mental. It is important to perform the duty entrusted to you efficiently, with dedication. Performance of one’s duty with willingness and happiness is dignity of labour. In simple terms, having a self-pride regarding the job one engages in, is the dignity of labour. Due to the success of the task done with dignity of labour, both the worker and his job, can be admired by the society.

For free distribution123

Can we live, if the city cleaners do not do their work properly? Then the environment would not be suitable for living. Think about it. Dignity of labour can be seen in every occupation, like engineers, doctors, drivers, city cleaners, technicians, farmers, etc.

Labourers cleaning a city

If you think about dignity of labour, social service occurs in all these occupations. Whatever employment you engage in, it contributes to the upliftment of the nation. There is a sense of pride as well. Therefore, it is better to be proud of that job. But, some professions require special knowledge and training. It should be understood that such jobs cannot be done by unskilled people. When choosing a job, one should consider not only the nature of the job, uniform and the salary, but also one’s ability and the service that could be rendered to the society. Unemployment is depicted as a major problem existing in Sri Lanka at present. But, in reality, there are a large number of occupations in the world of work. The problem is due to the weaknesses with dignity of labour, there is an unwillingness on the part of some people to select some jobs. Most of the people expect jobs in government offices. You will see in the newspapers that there are lots of vacancies in the field of industry, as well.

Activity

²Collect a weekend newspaper from the nearest library. Classify and write the vacancies advertised in it, into the government sector, private sector and self employment sector.

The answer given by John Foster and Simo Foster in 2014, is important to understand the question ‘Why do people work? It helps to understand the importance of the dignity of labour.

Working with others helps earn money, to get experience, to gather qualifications, to give benefits to the society, to do something desired and for time management.

^John Foster and Simo Foster 2014&

124For free distribution

Enjoying dignity of labour with the job you do, you can engage in a job with happiness and contentment. Several benefits can be identified in working with dignity of labour.

Benefits that can be gained in working with dignity of labour

To the employer

 Raising reputation of the organisation

 Promoting public appreciation towards the organisation

 Ability to work with other competitive organisations

 Increasing motivation among the employees

 Increasing profit in the organisation

To the customers

 Ability to be fulfilled their requirements easily

 Witnessing social efficiency

 Balancing emotions

 Cultivating loyalty towards the organisation

 Building up credibility

To the employee

 Dignity in their occupation

 Desire to learn more about the occupation

 Job satisfaction and contentment

 Work for the organisation devotedly

 Motivation to perform their duties at their best

Every occupation contributes towards social uplift

Equal development in every field is needed for the development of a country. Employment in industry, agriculture and service contribute towards social development. Social progression is the development of society. It cannot be achieved by one or two occupations. The following chart shows several needs that must be fulfilled for the development of the society.

For free distribution125

 Basic needs of man (food, housing, clothes, etc.)

 Infrastructure facilities (water, electricity, telephones, roads, etc.)

 Opportunities to spend leisure profitably

 Maintenance of security and peace

 Services like education, health, transport, etc

 Sources of sufficient income for a living

Needs that must be fulfilled for social progression

Different persons contribute to supply the above mentioned needs. When there is no co-operation among all these groups, it disturbs the existence as well as the progression of the society.

From higher officers, various groups contribute their labour towards social progress. These groups contribute equally to maintain services efficiently. Hence, without any difference, appreciation of the services rendered by all, contribute towards the uplift of the society. Selecting an occupation, according to one's willingness, qualifications and potential, one can direct one's job for the benefit of the society.

What will be the condition in a city if the cleaners do not report to work in a day? Can we say that their service is not important? Value of their service is at a higher level, isn’t it?

Activity

²Select several jobs present in your area and list out their services to the society.

126For free distribution

Importance of skilled labour

Labour is a factor towards production. Benefit received for one's labour is called the salary. Contributions provided by people to complete any work qualitatively is termed as labour. Knowledge, attitude and skills we achieve through education affect labour. Productivity of labour occurs according to the levels of knowledge, attitude and skills of the labourer.

Labour can be divided into two parts;

Physical labour

²Occupations that require more physical energy.

²Driving, farming, lifting heavy loads, tea plucking and occupations in the industrial field

Mental labour

²Professions that require more brain (mind) work.

²Jobs in the fields of medical, legal, engineering, planning, teaching, administration etc.

Labour can be divided into two parts such as skilled labour and unskilled labour. Labourers with special training or have special skills are skilled labourers. The level of skilled labour cannot be attained merely by the knowledge acquired through education. Following a special training relevant to the particular profession is necessary to become a skilled labourer. A training can be defined as providing professional experience and competencies relevant to a particular occupation.

Consider the following examples;

 Giving a special practical training under a specialist to a House Officer (Medical graduate under training)

 Prior to granting of driving licence, drivers must get a special training and pass a practical test.

For free distribution127

 Giving all the teachers a special training relevant to teaching and frequent in-service training

Many people believe that no training is needed to perform physical labour. But, even in a factory, by giving a special training regarding the operation of the machinery, efficiency of the workers can be increased.

Two ways for training for employment

1. Pre Service Training - Training given prior to recruitment

e.g. Training given in Technical Colleges on house wiring, teacher training given at Colleges of Education

2. In-service Training - Training given after recruitment

e.g. Setting to work under a trainer in repairing automobile, special training given to professionals like physicians, teachers, etc. from time to time while in service

Some occupations in the world of work require specific training. Experience, duration of service, as well as training are required for trained (skilled) labour. e.g. Flying aircraft, space voyages, surgical operations, use of high technological equipment in factories etc.

Special attention is paid to trained workers for the occupations present in the world of work. Trained workers are offered higher salaries as they can work more efficiently than unskilled workers. Training is essential to a worker and it makes him/her an outstanding person in the field of work. In Sri Lanka, there are a number of different institutes and courses that offer training to win the world of work. National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) for technical field is graded from level 3 to level 7. Anyone can start achieving this qualification even at the period of schooling.

128For free distribution

Institutes that offer vocational training

 Vocational Training Authority

 National Apprenticeship Board

 National Youth Council

 Technical Colleges

 Higher Technical Institute

 Vidatha Centres

 Nenasala

 Hotel Schools

Courses offered

 Electrical Technician

 Plumber

 Woodworker

 Draftsmanship

 Computer

 English and other languages

 Food and Culinary

 Home Decoration

 Beauty Culture

 Landscaping

In addition to the few government institutions mentioned above, vocational training courses are provided by the private sector too.

e.g.:  Private Technical Colleges

 Institutions providing courses on manoeuvring heavy vehicles

 Institutions providing courses on beauty culture, food processing, etc

 Computer training institutions

 English language training institutions

 Secretarial and receptionist training institutes

For free distribution129

Some advertisements on vocational training

Activity

1. What are the vocational training centres in your area?

2. What are the courses provided by them?

3. Read newspaper articles on vocational training institutes and list out the names and courses provided by them.

Qualities of a good worker

Labour force is the major factor in the development of a country. Hence, presence of a labour force, with better characteristics is an asset to a country. Due to the development of better qualities in a worker, attitude, dedication, and contribution towards labour can be raised to a higher position.

130For free distribution

There are different opinions presented on the qualities of a good worker. The following are some of those.

Fair play

Helpfulness

Accuracy

Bravery

Strength

Cheerfulness

Convincingness

Open-mindedness

Organizability

Logicality

Orderliness

Sensitivity

Sociability

Politeness

Inquisitiveness

Punctuality

Responsibility

Tolerance

Creativity

Trustworthyness

Enthusiasm

Honesty

Co-operativeness

Eagerness

Efficiency

Liveliness

Mercifulness

Some other characteristics that a worker must possess are given below:

• Reporting to work on time• Staying the whole period on duty at the place of work,dedication• Working with job satisfaction• Fulfilling duties and responsibilities• Cooperation• Collectedness• Development of the profession

For free distribution131

• Respecting leadership• Honouring rules• Regulations• Traditions of the institution

• Not linking the private and political life with the job

Activity

²According to you, what are the good qualities of a good employee? List them out.

Expectations of the place of work

The place of work can be introduced as the place where the world of work becomes active or it is the place where employees perform their duties.

e.g. Physician - Hospital

Teacher - School

Machine Operator - Factory

The employer expect from his employees a good profit for the organisation while enhancing good will and customer satisfaction.

Craig D. Jerald has lined up several competencies according to their importance, expected from the employee.

1. Critical thinking and problem solving

2. Using information technology

3. Group activities and co-operation

4. Creativity and being innovative towards new production

5. Working according to varieties

6. Developing leadership

132For free distribution

7. Developing communication skills

8. Following in working etiquette

9. Working with courtesy

10. Self orientation/life-long learning

11. Training in foreign languages

^Craig D. Jerald, 2009&

Here, the necessity for change in both mind and behaviour of the employee is pointed out.

In the same way, several expectations in a place of work are also shown below:

• Maintain the appearance of the work place properly

• Punctuality

• Work on time

• Dedication towards the development of the work place

• Efficiency

• Providing maximum service for the salary drawn

You can collect more information about this by meeting the Head of a private or government institute in your area.

Rights and responsibilities of employees

The quality of goods or services depend on the personal satisfaction and the completion of personal needs. If personal satisfaction is needed, it is necessary to provide rights of the employees. If the personal needs are fulfilled, a better result can be expected.

Rights of employees mean the provisions gained by the employee to proceed with his employment. Several regulations are imposed in order to protect the rights of the employees in Sri Lanka. Some of them are given below:

For free distribution133

 Act of Employee’s Provident Fund

 Act of Employee's Trust Fund

 Act of employing women, youths and children

 Act of employing women in the mining industry

 Salary control board, ordinance of maternity leave, ordinance of trade union

 Act of shop and office employees

 Act of Sri Lanka foreign service (employment) Special regulations have been set for the protection of rights of the workers by the above mentioned Acts.

On most occasions, workers can be seen protesting to win their rights. Workers must not only focus their attention on their rights but to their duties and responsibilities too. It should not be forgotten that if the duties and responsibilities are regularly fulfilled, the rights too will be achieved in equal proportion. Several such duties and responsibilities could be indicated as follows:

Rights

² Working with dignity

² Fulfilling basic needs

² Safety in the place of work

² Clean and pleasant place of work

² Obtaining necessary tools and equipment needed for the job

² Training relevant to the job

² Privilege to entitlement leave

²Trade union activities

²Granting promotions on qualifications

Duties

²Reporting to work on time ²Maintaining personal appearance to match the occupation ²Keeping a good behaviour ²Working hard

²Working as a team member

²Performing service needs without delay ²Protection of property in the workplace ²Safeguarding the prestige of the workplace

134For free distribution

Activity

²Write an article to a wallpaper on the importance of performing one's duties effectively in an office.

Improving personal professional qualities

It is important to work in unison in the world of work. It is also important to keep one's personal performance level high. Performance of task means to put one’s skills into practice at the maximum level. There, the most important thing is the selecting an occupation that matches with one’s skills, capabilities and choice.

At present, it is important to use modern technology rather than traditional methods to maintain a higher performance level. Improvement of the professional qualities by the employees is important. To work for the recognition of the employment skills, expected by the world of work and the skills possessed by oneself is also an important factor.

Characteristics to be improved by the employee himself

 Working in group sense

 Ability to work in different languages

 Improvement of leadership qualities

 Skills in analyzing

 Maintenance of good inter- personal relationship

 Maintenance of higher personality

 Taking decisions and solving problems

 Use of modern technical equipment

For free distribution135

A group working with computers

There are many various ways of learning to improve professional qualities personally;

Obtaining experiences on job Committees, conferences Field trips Case studies Awareness sessions Various leaflets

Methods of learning professional qualities

Obtaining experience after joining the job

 Courses conducted by universities. Courses conducted by vocational training centres.

 Group learning

 Self learning

Classroom learning

 Conducting various courses Seminars Workshops

Maintaining relationships and feedback

 Training Evaluation of performance

The above learning methods presented by the University of South Florida (2014) can also be utilized to improve professional qualities of the employees in Sri Lanka.

136For free distribution

Strategies that satisfy customers

Customer is the person who obtains service from an institute. Satisfaction of the customer about the service obtained leads to the development of an institute. Especially, private institutions pay special attention to the satisfaction of the customers, to keep attached, which would, on the other hand, be helpful for their progression.

Look at the customers of a telephone company. Though the price increases, customers do not give up as they are satisfied with the service they are provided with.

The above is the certification for customer satisfaction. Furthermore, receiving the letters of commendations organizing the functions of appreciation, giving publicity to that institute, etc. are the certificates of customer satisfaction.

Jerry Gregoire 2013 has shown 9 strategies of making customers satisfied.

01. Treat customers as your boss

02. Evaluate the customer satisfaction

03. Build confidence in customers

04. Correct the mistakes committed by customers

05. List out the expectations of customers

06. Observe and identify the customers correctly

07. Do the business through e mails

08. Communicate with customers through social websites

09. Avoid giving false information to customers

(Jerry Gregoire, 2013)

Some other strategies that world satisfy customers could be identified.

For free distribution137

Maintaining frequent accountability, holding live discussions, quick response, offering positive experiences, offering personal help, thinking at customers' point of view, listening to the customers, treating customers the way you are satisfied.

You may have seen displayed sayings for admiring the customers in some institutions. They too are some methods of making customers satisfied.

Activity

²If you are the employer, list out the strategies that you will follow to make your customers satisfied. ² Collect sayings that have been exhibited in different institutions, admiring the customers and create a similar saying by yourself.

Earning income and the life style

When we study the world of work, we find that most of the people prefer engaging in professions like practising medicine and engineering as higher income and social recognition could be obtained through them. Accordingly, income is one of the principal factors in the world of work. Even when applying for a job, it is the salary, that is considered first because ability to earn a good income helps to improve the standard of living to lead a good life style.

Advantages and disadvantages that affect an institution according to the employee’s income are;

²Increase the efficiency of the employee ²Satisfaction of the employee ²Minimizing the wastage or destruction of resources ²Decrease the corruption and theft of the workers ²Become loyal to the institute

Advantages -

138For free distribution

²Increase in taking leave ²Delay of work ²Occurrence of various struggles ²Revealing the institutional information to outsiders ²Motivation towards theft ²Vacate the service after short terms ²No enthusiasm for the improvement of the institute

Disadvantages -

Receiving a higher income, employees tend to work in a friendly manner towards the institute and try to maintain their professional qualities, like behaviour and personality, at higher level. On the other hand, if sufficient salary is not received, he will damage the institute as well as his own life by engaging in various corruptions, taking briberies, stealing, etc. The institute also must pay attention to increase the income of the employees by making it sufficient for living. The employees too must adjust their lifestyle to suit their income.

Summary

 There is a variation in the world of work.

 All employments are important to society.

 There is no difference between high or low, among occupations.

 Working with dignity of labour causes job satisfaction.

 All employments cause social progress.

 While labour is important for occupations, there is a higher demand for skilled labour.

 Good qualities must be improved as a labourer.

 It is necessary to be attentive to the expectations of the workplace.

 It is important to be aware of duties and responsibilities of workers.

 Improvement of personal task is important to the institution as well as to the worker himself.

For free distribution139

 Keeping the customer satisfied is the responsibility of the employee.

 Income earned from the employment influences the life pattern of the employee.

Assignment

1. Choose a field of employment you hope to engage in future, according to your future professional expectations.

2. After discussing with the teacher in charge of career guidance in your school, prepare a list including professional skills that you will have to improve.

3. Prepare an article to the wallpaper, including the service you are going to render to the society through it.

140For free distribution