==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution96

UNIT 09

Our Beautiful World

Activity 1

Act out

Clouds are FascinatingYogesh : Diyath, why are you looking at the sky? Are you looking for flying saucers?

Senura: No, I’m not. I am looking at those wonderful shapes created by

the clouds. Look! Those two clouds look like two dinosaurs. That cloud over there looks like a giant climbing up a hill.

Diyath: I can’t see the dinosaurs. Where are they?

Yogesh:They are near that large cloud shaped

like a tree.

Diyath: Let me see. Yes, one looks like a T-Rex,

but the one next to it looks like a huge elephant.

Yogesh: You are right. It’s changing now. There! It

floated fast. It looked as if it was jumping into a river.

Diyath: That small cloud over there looks like a cart.

Yogesh: Look over there! That dark cloud looks like a

crow. It is flying above the cart.

For free distribution97

Diyath: Isn’t it a dragon? There’s smoke coming out of its mouth.

Yogesh: I think it’s a crow. Look, there’s a horse jumping over a fence.

Diyath: Yes, now it is running down the path. This is very interesting.

We can imagine anything.

Yogesh: One day, I would like to look at clouds

from an aeroplane. Do aeroplanes fly below the clouds?

Diyath: I think they fly above the clouds. Let’s ask

our science teacher.

Activity 2

Speaking - Pair Work

Can you identify the shapes of these clouds? Discuss with your partner and identify the shapes.

3

2

4

1

For free distribution98

Activity 3

Reading

Look at the pictures and mark the sentences correct (√) or incorrect (×).

1. A man is climbing down the hill.

2. The dinosaur is near the tree.

3. The buffaloes are jumping into the stream.

4. The crow is flying above the cart.

For free distribution99

5.The horse is jumping over the fence.

6.The horse is running down the meadow.

7. The aeroplane is flying below the clouds.

Prepositions

For free distribution100

Activity 4

Writing

Look at the above pictures and complete the sentences.1. The aeroplane is flying ………………….. the clouds.2. Sumali is standing …………….. to her brother.3. The eagle is flying ……………. the mountain.4. Some milk is being poured ………….. the glass.5. Rohan is climbing ……………. the stairs.6. Meena is sliding ……….. the railing.7. The cat is sitting …………….. the dog.8. The sheep is jumping ………….. the fence.

Activity 5

Speaking and Writing

Describe the picture using the words given below.

near, into, up, down, over, below, next to, above

For free distribution101

Activity 6

Listening

Read the sentences given below to your friend. Your friend should draw the pictures in the given boxes. Refer to Unit 10 Activity 02 of your workbook.

1. First draw a house. Now draw a well near the house.2. Draw a two-storey building. Label it “Hospital.” Then draw another small building next to it. Label it “Pharmacy.”3. Draw a table. Now draw a light bulb hanging above it.4. Draw a fish tank. Draw two fish in the water.5. Draw some steps. Now draw a ball bouncing down the steps.6. Draw a coconut tree. Now draw a snake slithering up the tree.

Reading

The Greatest Artist

Once upon a time in ancient China, there lived a very talented artist. Everybody admired and praised his paintings. Little by little the artist became very proud of his skill. He began to think that he was the best artist in the whole world. “I have learnt everything about painting. There’s nothing anybody can teach me,” he

often boasted.

One day the Emperor wanted to get his portrait painted. So he ordered all the artists in the country to bring their finest paintings to the palace. The artist was very happy. He was sure that he would be chosen to draw the Emperor’s picture.

For free distribution102

At the palace the artist was asked to meet the Emperor’s Chief Minister. “I have heard about your paintings. They are famous,” the Minister said. “But I think you have a lot to learn.” The Minister asked him to go to the Li River and meet the greatest artist in the whole world. “She has painted many fine pictures. Learn something from her.”

The artist was disappointed and angry. “Why haven’t I heard anything about such an artist?” he wondered. But he was also curious about the other artist. He travelled to the banks of the Li River and asked the villagers about the famous artist. They smiled and pointed at the river.

The artist hired a boat and started his voyage. As the boat moved, the artist was amazed by the natural beauty of the surroundings. The leaves of the trees glittered green and gold. Beautiful mountains were reflected in the clear water. White clouds covered the mountain tops.“I have never seen anything as beautiful as this,” the artist thought. “Have I ever painted such a beautiful picture?” he asked himself. He felt ashamed of thinking that he knew everything about art. He realized that he finally met the greatest artist of all, Mother Nature.

Adapted from a Chinese fable.

Activity 7

1. Read the story and select the correct answers.

1. This story is from ……………. a. Japan b. China c. India

2. The artist was …………..a. very good at painting b. lazy c. not very good at painting

3. The artist became …………… about his work.a. proud b. unhappy c. careless

For free distribution103

4. The ………………… wanted to get his portrait painted.a. Chief Minister b. artist c. Emperor

5. The Chief Minister told the artist ………….a. to draw the Emperor’s picture. b. to learn from the greatest artist. c. to go back home.

6.The scenery around the Li River was …………..a. not as beautiful as the artist’s paintings. b. more beautiful than his paintings. c. not nice.7. According to the story, the greatest artist of all is ………..a. the artist in this story. b. the Chief Minister. c. Mother Nature.

Plurals

Leafleavesloaf of bread loaves of bread

1. Add ‘s’ to the singular form. e.g. :- school - schools2. Singular nouns ending with ‘consonant + y’ should be pluralized by

adding ‘ies’ e.g:- city - cities3. Singular nouns ending with ‘vowel + y’ should be pluralized by adding

‘s’ e.g:- toy - toys4. Some singular nouns ending with ‘f / fe’ should be pluralized by adding

‘ves’ e.g:- loaf - loaves

For free distribution104

Activity 8

Reading

half, life, shelf, handkerchief, leaf, wolf, loaf, knife

Use the given words correctly to complete the sentences.

1. Don’t eat the whole apple. Give me a ………….. of it.2. All the ………………. in the library are filled with books.3. I heard some ………………. howling in the jungle.4. Mother sliced three ……….. of bread to make sandwiches.5. The young …………. of the Na tree are red.

Activity 9

Reading

The Present Perfect Tense

Notice how the present perfect tense is used.

• I have finished my work.• Surani has read that novel.

• Have you brought your passport? • Has she taken her medicine?

•We have not / haven’t eaten dragon fruit before.• He has not / hasn’t ridden a motorbike before.

• Have they not / Haven’t they been to Jaffna?• Has he not / Hasn’t he fin-ished packing?

Formation

has / have + past participle

For free distribution105

Activity 10

Pair Work

Ask and answer these questions with your friend. you been to Trincomalee/Nuwara Eliya, …?you seen a polar bear/tiger/ lion, ..?you finished your homework?you read Madol Doowa/Great Expectations, …?your family been to Horton Plains?you been to Adam’s Peak/ Madu church/ Nallur Kovil, ?your sister / brother watched the movie ‘Harry Potter?you ever eaten Durian?

Has/Have

Activity 11

Writing

Construct sentences.

The catIThe dogsThe phonehas/have

chased

drunkstoppedbought

ringing.a new bicycle.the birds away.some milk.

IShehas not/have not(hasn’t/haven’t)broughtdonemy umbrella.her homework.

Has/Haveyouheseenmetthe new students?the principal?

Hasn’t/Haven’tsheyoupaidcompletedher work?the bill yet?

For free distribution106

Oceans

Reading

Oceans cover about 71% of the earth’s surface. Read about them and find the necessary information.

The Pacific Ocean

The Pacific Ocean is the largest and the deepest of all oceans. It covers more than 30% of the earth’s surface. The word “pacific” means peaceful in Latin. So its name means “the peaceful ocean.” The deepest known part on the earth, the Mariana Trench is in this ocean. Its lowest point is called the Challenger Deep. The largest coral reef in the world, the Great Barrier Reef is also situated in the Pacific.

The Atlantic OceanThe Atlantic Ocean is the second largest ocean in the world. It covers about 20% of the world’s surface. The longest above-ground mountain range is the Andes. But the Mid-Atlantic Range which is mostly situated in the Atlantic Ocean is a mountain range much longer than the Andes. Most of it is in the Atlantic. Greenland, the world’s biggest island is also located in the Atlantic Ocean. The Atlantic was the first ocean to be crossed by ship and aeroplane.

For free distribution107

The Indian Ocean

The Indian Ocean is the third largest ocean in the world. It is also the warmest. The Indian Ocean was mentioned as “Ratnakara” (a mine of gems) in ancient Sanskrit literature. About 40% of the world’s oil comes from the Indian Ocean.

The Arctic Ocean

The Arctic Ocean is the smallest and the shallowest ocean. It is almost covered by ice in winter. Polar bears are a common sight on the Arctic ice. The world’s largest jellyfish known as the Lion’s Mane jellyfish is also found in the Arctic Ocean.

The Southern Ocean

In the year 2000, the International Hydrographic Organization named a new ocean called the Southern Ocean. It is the fourth largest ocean. It is also called the Antarctic Ocean. It is the home of emperor penguins and albatrosses.

For free distribution108

Activity 12

Reading

Read the passages and complete the table.

• The largest ocean:• The deepest part of the earth:• The lowest point in the Mariana Trench:• The world’s largest coral reef:• The longest above- ground mountain range:• The first ocean crossed by ship and aeroplane:• The world’s biggest island:• The warmest ocean:• The world’s largest species of jellyfish:• Another name for the Southern Ocean:

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

Study the following table.

PositiveComparativeSuperlativebigsmalltallshortlongcleverstrongbeautifulinterestinggood

biggersmallertallershorterlongerclevererstrongermore beautifulmore interestingbetter

biggestsmallesttallestshortestlongestclevereststrongestmost beautifulmost interestingbest

Read these sentences.

•The Indian Ocean is large.•The Atlantic Ocean is larger than the Indian Ocean.•The Pacific is the largest ocean.

For free distribution109

Activity 13

Writing

Complete the table.

e.g. :- talldeepsimpleshallowlowwarmoldyounghighcoldbusyslowfunny

taller………………….tallest……………………

Activity 14

Sing and enjoy the following life cycle song of an ant.

Life Cycle SongAn ant starts its life in an egg, Then hatches into a larva It changes inside a pupa And then it becomes an adult.

ANT life CY-cle, ANT life CY-cle, Egg, larva, pupa, a-dult

ANT life CY-cle, ANT life CY-cle, Egg, larva, pupa, a-dult! Liana Mahoney

For free distribution110

Now write a similar poem on the life cycle of any one of the following.1. A butterfly starts as an egg... 2. A beetle starts as an egg... 3. A bee starts as an egg.... You may use the following words.sting, hive, honey, honeycomb, antennae, nectar, black, shiny

Activity 15

Listening

Write the correct letter.

Mihiri - ................... Manjula’s bag - ................... Ruvini - ................... Athula’s bag - ................... Samadhi - ................... Rizvi’s bag - ...................

abcdef

“The earth laughs in flowers.”

What do you think of the above saying? Is it true? Why?

Flowers are one of the most beautiful creations of nature. When we look at them, we become relaxed and happy. They also help pollination and provide food for insects like bees and butterflies.

For free distribution111

Look at the pictures of the flowers and complete the table given for activity 16.

anthuriumblue water lilywhite water lily

jasminequeen of the nightorchid

marigoldsunflowerlotus

temple flowerbaberton daisieswater snowflake

For free distribution112

Activity 16

Fragrant flowers...........................Flowers that bloom at night...........................Flowers with an economic value...........................Flowers that are mostly used for religious purposes...........................Flowers that keep pests away from crops...........................Flowers that are used for medicinal purposes...........................Flowers commonly used in floral decorations...........................

Activity 17

Group Work

Draw a picture of a flower. Do not show it to the other groups. The other groups should ask questions and guess the name of the flower.

What colour is it?

Is it a fragrant flower?

Does it grow on land?

Does it bloom during

daytime?How many petals does it have?

It has five/many

petals.

It’s white.

Yes, it is./ No, it isn’t.

Yes/No.

For free distribution113

I Wonder

I wonder why the grass is green, And why the wind is never seen?

Who taught the birds to build a nest, And told the trees to take a rest?

Or, when the moon is not quite round, Where can the missing bit be found?

Who lights the stars, when they blow out,And makes the lightning flash about?

Who paints the rainbow in the sky,And hangs the fluffy clouds so high?

Why is it now, do you suppose, That Dad won’t tell me, if he knows?

Jeannie Kirby

Activity 18

Read the poem and select the best answer.

1. a. The title “I Wonder” means the speaker is: i. impatient ii. curious iii. happy

b.What is never seen? i. clouds ii. wind iii. lightning

c. According to the poem, the trees are: i. swaying in the wind ii. growing iii. resting

For free distribution114

d. The person who speaks here is a: i. woman ii. child iii. man

2. Write down the rhyming words you can find in the poem.

3. How many lines are there in this poem? 4. What are the images (pictures) that come to your mind when you read this poem? e.g. :- green grass