==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

Catholicism

Grade 8

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2016Second Print - 2018Third Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0565-2

Published by : Educational Publications Department

Printed by : Sisara Printway (Pvt) Ltd. No. 110, Pagoda Road, Pitakotte.

iii

iv

Foreword

With the continuous advancement of the world, the education sector too is transformed. Therefore, if we require the creation of a student community who could confront the future challenges successfully, our learning teaching process must constantly utilize effective approaches. It is our responsibility to disseminate the knowledge of the new world while assisting to create global citizens with good values. Our department is actively engaged in producing learning tools with the great aim of contributing to enlighten the minds of the children of the country.

A textbook is a repository of knowledge. At times, it takes us to a world of entertainment while developing our critical thinking faculties. It promotes our hidden potentials. In the coming years, the memories related to these textbooks will bring you happiness. While making the maximum use of this valuable learning tool, you must essentially access other useful knowledge spaces too. I wish that you would gain the ability to enlighten the future as citizens with knowledge and values by using this textbook.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the panels of writers, editors and reviewers as well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department for the contribution made on this endeavor.

P.N. Ilapperuma,Commissioner General of Educational Publications,Educational Publications DepartmentIsurupaya,Battaramulla.26.06.2020

v

Monitoring and Supervision

P.N. Ilapperuma - Commissioner General of Educational Publications

Direction

W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli - Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination

R.D. Wijewickrama - Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

S.G.D.N.L. Samarakoon - Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Advisory Board

Most Rev. Dr. Oswald Gomis

Rt. Rev. Dr. Maxwell Silva

Panel of Editors

Very Rev. Fr. Piyal Janaka Fernando - National Chatechetical Director, No: 19 Balcombe place, Colombo 8.

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya.

Panel of Writers

Rev. Sister Mary Nimalka - Teacher, St. Joseph's Boys' College Nugegoda.

S.G.K.D.L.C. Prasad - I.S.A. Zonal Education Office, Homagama.

vi

Marini Dhammika Perera - I. S. A. Divisional Education Office, Colombo North, Maligawatta, Colombo 10

N. Fransisca Rajayogini - Teacher, St. Joseph's Balika M.V.

Colombo 14

Anne Nishanthi Rathnasinghe - Teacher, W.P/ Pili/ St. Joseph's Balika M.V., Nugegoda

Transalation

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya.

Language Editor

Rev. Fr. Gregory Fernando - Assistant Director of Education, Ministry of Education, Isurupaya

Computer Type setting

Rev. Fr. D.M.D.A.J.C Dassanayake - Visiting Lecturer, Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya.

Page Layout and Cover Page

L.A. Sanduni Nilanka Pathmasiri - Computer Unit Educational Publications Department

vii

CONTENTS

Page

The Holy Bible1. Author of the Gospel of Luke 12. Background of the Gospel of Luke 43. Other Names for the Gospel of Luke 74. The Message of the Gospel of Luke 125. Outline of the Gospel of Luke 15

Faith in the Holy Trinity6. Messianic Prophecies 197. Fulfilment of the Messianic Prophecies 238. St. John the Baptist 279. Mission of Lord Jesus 3210. Kingdom of God 3611. Miracles of Lord Jesus 42

Strength For the life of Faith12. The Eucharist 4713. Preparation to Receive Holy Communion 5114. Sacrament of Confirmation 5415. Preparation to Receive the Sacrament of Confirmation 5916. Rite of Confirmation 62

Living the life of Faith17. Worship of One God 6518. Life in One God 7019. Honouring Saints 7320. Honour God’s Name 7621. Keep Sunday Holy 80

Life of Prayer22. Divine Worship 8323. Components of Divine Worship 8524. Holy Mass 8925. Other Liturgical Celebrations 93

viii

1

Author of the Gospel of

Luke

Teacher : Children, God has given us many talents. Our duty is to improve them

and become useful people to the society. From the childhood, I had a great aspiration to become a teacher. I like to teach children and inculcate good habits in them. Today I am a teacher. Avishka, what is your future hope?

Avishka : Teacher, I want to be a doctor and help the helpless patients.

Teacher : Very good. You have to work hard to achieve that goal.

Kasun : What is your future hope?

Kasun : I want to be a priest. I am a member of the “Altar Servers’ Association.”

I want to serve all the people.

Teacher : It is great. Let us pray that he may realize his goal.

Thilina : I want to become a writer. I want to write many books.

Teacher : Thilina, you can change the society, inculcate good attitudes in people.

A writer is very powerful.

1.1 Picture: St. Luke

1

2

Today, I am going to speak about a clever writer. The whole world has accepted that he is a great author. The theme of his writing was Jesus Christ, the Son of God. That author is St. Luke.

The life of our saviour, Jesus Christ is well presented in the Gospel of Luke. This is a work of an intelligent author. He is not only an author, but also a historian, artist and doctor. He is the only gentile (non-Jew) to write a Gospel. It may contain many details, obtained from others. According to the tradition of the Church, he has learnt these details from Virgin Mary, the mother of Jesus.

St. Luke is not only the author of the Gospel of Luke, but also that of the Acts of the Apostles. None of the two books mention that it was written by St. Luke, but the language and the style suggest that they belong to one and the same author. St. Luke was a Christian of the apostolic era. He could use the Greek language fluently.

The symbol of the Gospel is “ox” because the first incident in the Gospel is the sacrifice of Zecharia. Bulls were sacrificed in the Old Testament.

He was a clever writer and a friend of St. Paul. This can be proved not only from the Acts of the Apostles, but also from the Epistles of St. Paul:

²² “Luke alone is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you; for he is very useful

in serving me” (2 Tim 4:11).²² “Sends greetings to you, and so do Mark … and Luke, my fellow workers”

(Philemon 1:24).²² “Luke the beloved physician ... greet you” (Colossians 4:14).

St. Luke joined St. Paul in his second and third missionary journeys. Therefore, St. Luke who wrote the Acts of the Apostles uses the terms, such as “we,” “our” and “us” in the Acts of the Apostles:

3

And when he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go on into Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them. Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a direct voyage to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis. And when she was baptized, with her household, she besought us, saying, If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay. And she prevailed upon us. As we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a slave girl who had a spirit of divination and brought her owners much gain by soothsaying. She followed Paul and us, crying, These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation. And when our days there were ended, we departed and went on our journey; and they all, with wives and children, brought us on our way till we were outside the city; and kneeling down on the beach we prayed and bade one another farewell. (Acts 16:10-17)

Just as St. Luke, we must use our talents to spread the Good News. We must praise God by using our talents. By our writing skills, we must try to spread God’s Word. We must write to the Wallpaper of the school and other mass media. We must encourage others also to do the same. We have to appreciate the great service, done by St. Luke by writing the Gospel. We have to make use of it in order to take the maximum benefit from it.

For Life

²² Be a messenger of the Good

News.

Activity

1. Write an article on St. Luke.2. Send your article to the children’s corner of the Catholic

Messenger (newspaper).

4

Background of the Gospel

of Luke

A clever author is capable of making use of available data and incidents to achieve the purposes and aims of his writing. Such a work is accepted as a successful one. As a clever writer, St. Luke has achieved his aims in writing the Gospel.

He speaks about the salvation of all the people. In doing so, he makes use of the available details magnificently. It is evident, when we look at the Gospel.

The purpose of the Gospel of Luke is to show that Jesus Christ is the saviour not only of Jews, but also that of the whole world. He has achieved this purpose in his Gospel. To do so, he has used details from Jesus’ life, teachings and incidents. The following examples testify to that:

1. St. Mathew starts the genealogy of Jesus from Abraham, the patriarch: “The

book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham …” (Matthew 1:1). It is from Abraham, from whom the nation of Jews began. Yet St. Luke begins the genealogy of Jesus not from Abraham, but from Adam: “... the son of Adam, the son of God” (Luke 3:23-38). It is from Adam from whom the human race began.

2. When Jesus is born, the angels sang: “Glory to God in the highest, and on

earth peace among men with whom he is pleased!” (Luke 2:14). In this hymn, “men” mean all the people, i.e. not only Jews. Thus it entails that Jesus is the saviour of the whole human race.

3. According to the Law of Moses, all Jewish firstborn had to be dedicated in the

Temple of Jerusalem. St. Joseph and St. Mary took baby Jesus to the Temple to do the ritual. Meanwhile there was a devout man in the Temple, called Simeon. He was looking for the consolation of Israel. He took Jesus up in his arms and blessed God and said: “Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou hast prepared in the presence of all peoples, a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to thy people Israel” (Luke 2:30-32). Thus it is clear that Jesus is the light and salvation of all the peoples.

2

5

4. Once Jesus was asked by a Pharisee (a lawyer of Moses’ Law), “Who is my

neighbour?” In answering that question, Jesus said the parable of the Good Samaritan:

And behold, a lawyer stood up to put him to the test, saying, "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He said to him, "What is written in the law? How do you read?" And he answered, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbour as yourself." And he said to him, "You have answered right; do this, and you will live." But he, desiring to justify himself, said to Jesus, "And who is my neighbour?" Jesus replied, "A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead. Now by chance a priest was going down that road; and when he saw him he passed by on the other side. So likewise a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side. But a Samaritan, as he journeyed, came to where he was; and when he saw him, he had compassion, and went to him and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine; then he set him on his own beast and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. And the next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper, saying, “Take care of him; and whatever more you spend, I will repay you when I come back.” Which of these three, do you think, proved neighbour to the man who fell among the robbers?" He said, "The one who showed mercy on him." And Jesus said to him, "Go and do likewise." (Luke 10:30-37)

Samaritan is a non-Jew. In this parable, it is the Samaritan who is praised.

Gospel of Luke was written in 80-85 A.D. Just as St. Luke realized his purpose in the Gospel, we also should realize our aims. Our final goal is to reach where God is. We have to work constantly to achieve that. Besides, from childhood we have to have good aims in life and try to achieve them intelligently. Thereby we can fulfil the aspirations of parents, teachers and elders.

6

Activity

1. Memorize the purpose of writing the Gospel of Luke and

write it down in your exercise book.2. Give two examples of how St. Luke realized that purpose

in the Gospel.

For LifeMeditate and find out the purpose of your life and work to realize it.

Lord Jesus paved the way for the salvation of whole mankind by His birth. In the same way, we too must reach not only those in the family, religion and parish, but also all the peoples.

7

Other Names for the Gospel

of Luke

Gospel of Luke

Gospel of Prayer

Gospel of the Gentiles

Gospel of Mercy

Gospel of the Holy Spirit

Gospel of Women

Gospel of the Poor

Gospel of the Marginalized

Accordingly we see that this Gospel has so many names. There are many reasons for each and every name. Let us examine some of the reasons.

1. Gospel of Prayer

Throughout the whole Gospel, a special attention is paid to prayer:

²² Holy Spirit descended upon Lord Jesus, while Lord Jesus was praying after

being baptized (Luke 3:21).²² Before choosing the apostles, Lord Jesus spent the whole night in prayer (Luke

6:12).²² At one occasion, when Lord Jesus had finished praying, one of the disciples

asked Lord Jesus to teach them to pray (Luke 11:1). Then Jesus taught “Our Father.”

3

8

By the Parable of the Widow and the Unjust Judge, Lord Jesus teaches that one has to pray persistently.

And he told them a parable, to the effect that they ought always to pray and not lose heart. He said, "In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor regarded man; and there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, “Vindicate me against my adversary.” For a while he refused; but afterward he said to himself, “Though I neither fear God nor regard man, yet because this widow bothers me, I will vindicate her, or she will wear me out by her continual coming.” … And will not God vindicate his elect, who cry to him day and night? … I tell you, he will vindicate them speedily.

(Luke 18:1-8)

2. Gospel of the Gentiles

Gentiles are non-Jews. Since the Gospel of Luke pays a special attention on Gentiles, this Gospel is called by this name. Here are some examples:

²² Angels declare that the birth of Lord Jesus is a Good News of great joy to all

the people (Luke 2:10).²² Simeon, a prophet declared that Lord Jesus is the light to the gentiles (Luke

2:32).²² It is the Samaritan, who helped the helpless person in the Parable of the Good

Samaritan (Luke 10:25-27).

3. Gospel of Mercy

Luke’s Gospel is called by this name, because it pays special attention to the occasions when Lord Jesus showed compassion to sinners. God looks for the sinners, just as a shepherd look for a wayward sheep. This can be seen in the parable of the lost sheep:

9

What man of you, having a hundred sheep, if he has lost one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one which is lost, until he finds it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbours, saying to them, “Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.” Just so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance. (Luke 15:4-7)

4. Gospel of the Holy Spirit

This Gospel pays a special attention to the Holy Spirit. Therefore, it is called by Gospel of the Holy Spirit: For an example, the Holy Spirit descended upon Jesus as a dove, when He was baptized.

5. Gospel of Women

This Gospel mentions about women more than any other Gospel. Here are some of the women:

²² Mary, the mother of Jesus (Luke 1:26-56, 2:1-21)²² Elizabeth (Luke 1:5-6)²² Prophetess, Anna (2:36-38)²² Widow at Nain (Luke 7:11-17)²² Sinful woman (Luke 7:36-50)²² Women were hospitable towards Jesus (Luke 8:1-3)²² Martha and Mary (Luke 10:38-42)²² Jesus heals the woman with a bent back (Luke 13:10-17)²² Jesus consoled the weeping women on his way to Calvary (Luke 23:27-28)

10

6. Gospel of the Poor

In the Gospel, it is said that the poor are pleasing to God and that they are praised Examples :

²² Lord Jesus’ birth was announced first to the poor shepherds: “ (Luke 2:10).²² According to Lord Jesus’ teaching, blessed are the poor: “Blessed are you poor,

for yours is the kingdom of God” (Luke 6:20).

7. Gospel of the Marginalized

In this Gospel, a special attention is paid to the marginalized:

²² The incident about Zacchaeus is an example (Luke 19:1-10)

Zacchaeus was a tax collector. He collected tax for the Roman Emperor. In the Jewish society, tax collectors were considered as sinners. It is because they collected by force more than required and kept the balance with them. Jesus showed compassion for them and took them to the correct path.

He entered Jericho and was passing through. And there was a man named Zacchaeus; he was a chief tax collector, and rich. And he sought to see who Jesus was, but could not, on account of the crowd, because he was small of stature. So he ran on ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up and said to him, “Zacchaeus, make haste and come down; for I must stay at your house today.” So he made haste and came down, and received him joyfully. And when they saw it they all murmured, “He has gone in to be the guest of a man who is a sinner.” And Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, “Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have defrauded any one of anything, I restore it fourfold.” And Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, since he also is a son of Abraham. For the Son of man came to seek and to save the lost.” (Luke 19:1-10)

11

We should not condemn anyone in the society. We must be merciful towards those who are not cared.

For LifeRespect the helpless.

Activity

1. Write five other names for the Gospel of Luke.2. Write three reasons why the Gospel of Luke is called

“the Gospel of the Poor.”

12

The Message of the

Gospel of Luke

From very ancient times people used various methods to communicate messages. Today people communicate with each other effectively and speedily by means of more developed methods.

Think. … What will you do if you get a very important message? Will you not try to understand it? Will you not share it with others? Its validity depends to the extent it is shared with the relevant party and the response received.

Today you will receive a very important message. We have already spoken about the Gospel of Luke. Today we are going to speak about its message. The message of the Gospel of Luke is universal. It is because its message is to the whole universe. Now let us examine and see what are those messages are:

1. Joy and Praise

One, who praises God, is happy. This Gospel has many hymns of praise. Some of them are:

²² Magnificat of Mary (Luke 1:46-55)²² Benedictus of Zechariah (Luke 1:68-79)²² Hymn of the angels “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among

men with whom he is pleased!” (Luke 2:14). ²² Hymn (Nunc Dimittis) of Simeon (Luke 2:29-32).

We should not forget to praise God, whenever we are happy.

2. Use of Wealth in a Responsible Way

²² St. John the Baptist invited to share what one has with those, having nothing

(Luke 3:10-14). ²² Lord Jesus preached against the hording of wealth (Luke 12:13-21, 16:14). ²² The parable of the rich man and Lazarus also testifies to this

4

13

The rich man could not go to the heaven because he neglected Lazarus (the poor) and did not help him. Therefore, we should not be addicted to wealth and property. We have to use them in a responsible way. We have to share them with those who do not have them. For that we have to get used to a simple way of life. To do so we have to be poor in spirit.

There was a rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen and who feasted sumptuously every day. And at his gate lay a poor man named Lazarus, full of sores, who desired to be fed with what fell from the rich man’s table; moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. The poor man died and was carried by the angels to Abraham’s bosom. The rich man also died and was buried; and in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham far off and Lazarus in his bosom. And he called out, “Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus to dip the end of his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am in anguish in this flame.” But Abraham said, “Son, remember that you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner evil things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish. And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, in order that those who would pass from here to you may not be able, and none may cross from there to us.” And he said, “Then I beg you, father, to send him to my father’s house, for I have five brothers, so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.” But Abraham said, “They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them.” And he said, “No, father Abraham; but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.” He said to him, “If they do not hear Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone should rise from the dead.” (Luke 16:19-31)

14

3. Sacrifices

²² The first incident in the Gospel is the sacrifice of Zachariah (Luke 1:5-25). ²² Each and every child had to be offered to God according to the Jewish law.

This law was fulfilled with regard to Jesus (Luke 2:22-31). ²² Jesus also went to the Passover feast at the Jerusalem Temple (Luke 2:41-52).

We have to obey rules and regulations of the society. Since the religious laws direct us to divine worship, we have to obey them too. We should be ready to sacrifice ourselves for the benefit of others, as Lord Jesus did.

These universal messages are found in the Gospel of Luke. We have to make use of them to enrich our lives.

For LifeMake the message of the Gospel, a light to your life.

Activity

1. List three messages, found in the Gospel of Luke.2. Write how you make use of one of these messages to

enrich your life.

15

Outline of the Gospel

of Luke

Think of your house. … From where you can enter the house? How many rooms are there in your house? Each room is separated for a special purpose. How doors and windows are situated? How many doors and windows are there? You can live in your house easily since you know the plan of the house. There was a planner for your house. According to his plan, your house was built.

A good book also has a plan, an outline. If we know it, we can use the book easily.

Since St. Luke was a good writer, he has written the Gospel with a plan. If we know it, we can read and understand it easily.

Preface (Luke 1:1-4)

As a clever writer, St. Luke gives a good preface at the beginning of the Gospel (Luke 1:1-4). However, what is recorded in the Gospel is not what St. Luke witnessed. He may have received those details from the eyewitnesses. What St. Luke wanted to write was an orderly account.

St. Luke presents the Gospel to “Your Excellency, Theophilus.” The second volume of the Gospel of Luke is “the Acts of the Apostles.” It is also presented to the same person (Acts 1:1). The meaning of the word, “Theophilus,” is “friend of God.” By the term, “Your Excellency,” he may be a respectable official in the society.

Infancy Narratives (Luke 1:5-2:52)

Only two evangelists speak of the childhood of Jesus. They are St. Matthew and St. Luke. Since St. Luke wants to compile an orderly account of Jesus, he begins his Gospel from the birth of Jesus. The birth of Jesus (Luke 2:1-20), Presentation of Jesus at the Temple of Jerusalem (Luke 2:22-38), Childhood of Jesus (Luke 2:39-40), Finding of Jesus at the Temple of Jerusalem after being lost (Luke 2:41-52) are narrated in the Gospel.

5

16

Preparation of Lord Jesus to His Ministry (Luke 3:1-4:13)

St. John the Baptist was entrusted with the obligation of preparing the crowds to welcome Lord Jesus. He did it by preaching and baptizing. As Isaiah foretold, it was he who was the voice in the wilderness (Isaiah 40:3-5). He was greater than any other servant of God, lived before him. He prepared the people spiritually for the coming of Jesus and Jesus’ ministry. By ascetic life and prayer, he spent a hard life. He was a great person who stood for the truth.

Map of Palestine at the Time of Lord Jesus

Lord Jesus’ Galilean Ministry (Luke 4:14-9:59)

Lord Jesus began His public ministry at Galilee. In this section there are information about His teachings and miracles.

Lord Jesus’ Journey from Galilee to Jerusalem (Luke 9:51-19:27)

Having finished Lord Jesus’ ministry in Galilee, He went to Jerusalem. This part gives many instructions to lead a good Christian life.

17

Palastine at the time of Jesus Christ

Sea of Galilee

Galilee

Mount Carmel

Nazareth

Nain

Caesarea

JappaArimathea

Emmaus JerichoBethpaiBethany

Dead Sea

Hebron

Jerusalem

Bethlehem

Jordan River

CapernaumCana

Caesarea Philippi

Mediterranean Sea

Samaria

Judea

Lord Jesus’ Ministry in Jerusalem (Luke 19:28-21:38)

This section gives Lord Jesus’ ministry in Jerusalem:

1. Luke 19:28-44: Triumphant entry of Lord Jesus to Jerusalem on a colt on the

Palm Sunday is described in this section.

18

2. Luke 19:45-48: This section describes that Lord Jesus expelled the sellers,

who were selling within the Temple of Jerusalem. Therefore, we must behave in our Churches in a worthy manner.3. Luke 20:1-21-37: This section describes what Lord Jesus did and said in

Jerusalem.

Lord Jesus’ Passion, Death, Resurrection and Appearances (Luke 22:1-24:53)

This is the most important section of the Gospels. It gives details about paschal ministry, (i.e., Jesus’ passion, death and resurrection) and appearances. This section also describes about the two disciples who went to Emmaus.

The success of every endeavour depends on the plan of it. Where there is a plan, there is order. If you want to be successful, get ready with a plan.

Activity

1. Name the main sections in the outline of the Gospel

of Luke.2. Identify the important places in the map of Palestine.

For LifeHave a plan for any of your work.

19

Messianic Prophecies

Our first parents were Adam and Eve. They disobeyed God. Therefore, they were expelled from Garden of Eden. Yet God loved the man who fell into sin by his own will and own fault. As a result of that, God promised to send a saviour so that man may have eternal life.

Call of Abraham

In order to send Lord Jesus Christ as the saviour of the world, God called Abraham to prepare the salvation history:

6.1 Picture: Adam and Eve

6

20

Now the LORD said to Abram (Abraham), "Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you, and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who curses you I will curse; and by you all the families of the earth shall bless themselves."

(Genesis 12:1-3)

Abraham responded to this call by going to the Promised Land as instructed by God. This is a testimony to his firm faith.

So Abram went, as the LORD had told him; and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their possessions which they had gathered, and the persons that they had gotten in Haran; and they set forth to go to the land of Canaan. When they had come to the land of Canaan, Abram passed through the land to the place at Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. At that time the Canaanites were in the land.

(Genesis 12:4-6)

Messianic Prophecies

Thus, God called Abraham to make a nation to send the saviour into the world. That nation is Jews. The greatest king of the Jews is David. By the following words, Nathan, a prophet foretold to King David that the saviour of world would come from Davidic lineage.

21

When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come forth from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. … And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure for ever before me; your throne shall be established for ever.

(2 Samuel 7:12-16)

The following prophecy foretold that the saviour would be born of a virgin:

Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

(Isaiah 7:14)

That virgin was St. Mary. Her son’s name would be “Immanuel." It means, “God is with us.” Since Lord Jesus is the Son of God, by Lord Jesus’ birth God came to dwell with us.

But you, O Bethlehem Ephrathah, who are little to be among the clans of Judah, from you shall come forth for me one who is to be ruler in Israel, whose origin is from of old, from ancient days. … And this shall be peace …

(Micah 5:2-5)

According to this passage, the saviour would be born in Bethlehem and he would be the prince of peace. He would bring peace by establishing the broken relationship.

Those who were called to fulfil the plan of salvation listened to the God’s word and obeyed it. We too are called to cooperate with the plan of salvation. God calls us

22

Activity

1. Write three prophesies that the prophets said about the

Messiah.2. Write three things that you can do to cooperate with the plan

of salvation.3. If you are called to perform the following tasks, how would

you fulfil them as a child of God: a. To be class monitor b. To organize mass at school c. To be the leader of the school sport meet d. To partake in a “sramadana”

For Life

²² Let us obey the word of God.²² Let us do the tasks enthusiastically, entrusted

to you.²² Let us nourish the Church by acting as a child

of God.

to perform various tasks in our capacity. We have to accept that and answer him generously. God reveals Himself by His word too. All are partakers of the plan of salvation.

23

Fulfilment of the Messianic Prophecies

Annunciation of St. John the Baptist’s birth

Zechariah was a Jewish priest. One day it fell to him by lot to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense. Angel of the Lord appeared to him. He was troubled when he saw the angel, and fear fell upon him. The angel said to him:

7

How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years. (Luke 1:18)

Since Zechariah did not believe the message, he had to face the consequences:

And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak until the day that these things come to pass, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time. (Luke 1:20)

Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer is heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John. (Luke 1:13)

He could not believe this message. Therefore he questioned the angel:

Just as the angel said, Zechariah and Elizabeth got a child and it was the realization of the prophecy of the angel.

24

Annunciation of Lord Jesus’ Birth to Virgin Mary

The angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth, to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. He said to Virgin Mary:

Hail, O favoured one, the Lord is with you! (Luke 1:28)

Virgin Mary was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered in her mind what sort of greeting this might be. Then the angel said to Virgin Mary:

Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favour with God. And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High; and the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David, and he will reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there will be no end. (Luke 1:30-33)

Having believed the angel Gabriel’s message, Virgin Mary obeyed the will of God.

St. Joseph was informed of the Birth of Lord Jesus

When Virgin Mary had been betrothed to St. Joseph, St. Joseph found that she was pregnant. St. Joseph was a just man, and therefore, he was unwilling to put her to shame, and decided to leave her quietly. While he was thinking of this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said:

25

Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit; she will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins. (Matthew 1:20-21)

When St. Joseph woke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him.

Birth of Lord Jesus

Long time ago in BethlehemSo the Holy Bible sayMary's boy child, Jesus ChristWas born on Christmas Day.

Chorus Hark now hear the angels sing A newborn king was born today And we may live for evermore Because of Christmas Day.

While shepherds watched their flock by night,They saw a bright new shining starthey hear a choir singThe music seemed to come from afar.

Chorus Joseph and his wife, Mary, Came to Bethlehem that night, They found no place to bear her child, Not a single room was in sight.

Chorus By and by they find a little nook In a stable all forlorn, And in a manger cold and dark, Mary's little boy was born.Chorus

26

When Lord Jesus was born, the messianic prophecies were fulfilled. Virgin Mary obeyed to the word of God and dedicated herself to God. St. Joseph listened to the word of God. We too should obey Him. God speaks to us in various ways. We have to listen to His voice. Jesus was born in Bethlehem as a poor man and He is well pleased with the poor.

Activity

1. Write the background of the following quotations. (By whom

to whom)

i. “How shall I know this? For I am an old man.”ii. “Hail, O favoured one, the Lord is with you!”iii. “… for he will save his people from their sins.”

For Life

²² Meditate the word of God and live

accordingly.

In those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled. This was the first enrolment, when Quirinius was governor of Syria. And all went to be enrolled, each to his own city. And Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be enrolled with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child. And while they were there, the time came for her to be delivered. And she gave birth to her first-born son and wrapped him in swaddling cloths, and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn. (Luke 2:1-7)

St. Luke reports the birth of Lord Jesus in the following words:

27

St. John the Baptist

8.1 Picture: St. John the Baptist

Sts. Zechariah and Elizabeth were the parents of St. John the Baptist. His mother, St. Elizabeth was a cousin of the Blessed Virgin Mary. He belonged to a Jewish priestly class.

On the eighth day they came to circumcise and to name the child, St. Zechariah gave the name given by the angel. At that time, he began to speak once again:

And he asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, "His name is John." And they all marvelled. And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, blessing God. (Luke 1:63-64)

St. John the Baptist started his ministry at Aenon, in the Jordan River. His food was locusts and wild honey. St. John the Baptist wore a garment of camel’s hair, with a leather belt around his waist. He had to prepare the way for the Messiah, Lord Jesus Christ.

8

28

Sermon of St. John the Baptist

Various types of people came to meet St. John the Baptist and hear his message. What was needed was to prepare the people to welcome the saviour. In view of that, a change of heart was necessary. So people had to turn away from sinful, selfish, cunning and dishonest ways.

Around Jordan River, St. John the Baptist invited all the people to have a conversion and to get baptized (Luke 3:3).

He said to the elite:

You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruits that befit repentance, and do not begin to say to yourselves, “We have Abraham as our father”; for I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham. (Luke 3:7-8)

The elite were proud and they thought that God will save them in spite of their failures in observing the law. Therefore, they did all sort of misdeeds. Hence St. John the Baptist insists that that they cannot be saved on the basis of being Abraham’s descendents and conversion of heart was a sine qua non. In the same way, we cannot be saved by being baptised people. We have to repent for our sins and get rid of our sins. Thereafter we have to live a life pleasing to God.

For St. John the Baptist, the Jewish leaders were like vipers. Vipers are attractive because their skin is colourful. Yet they are poisonous. Such kind of selfish and dangerous people, who pretend themselves to be good, are not necessary to the society. They are not human. Society needs good people. For that a change of heart is necessary, Change of heart is a result of repentance. To repent, one has to admit one’s weaknesses deficiencies and faults humbly. If not, St. John the Baptist announces the repercussion:

29

Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees; every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. (Luke 3:9)

In this manner he shows that the human history is on the eve of decisive moment. On hearing this, the common people asked “What then shall we do?” He answered them:

He who has two coats, let him share with him who has none; and he who has food, let him do likewise. (Luke 3:11)

One must have at least two tunics. So that he can wash one while wearing the other. By this saying he is asking to share even what is necessary for oneself.

Afterwards he advises the tax collectors:

Collect no more than is appointed you. (Luke 3:13)

Those days Palestine was a colony of the Roman emperor. Roman emperor charged various taxes from their colonies. The tax collectors had a commission from taxation, but the tax collectors charged more and kept the extra with them in addition to the commission. St. John the Baptist said to the soldiers:

Rob no one by violence or by false accusation, and be content with your wages. (Luke 3:14)

30

He wanted inculcate good attitudes in order to build a just society without dishonest and shred ways. If he comes to Sri Lanka today, what would be his message for you?

Lord Jesus’ witness about St. John the Baptist

When people wanted to know whether St, John the Baptist was the Messiah, he said to them:

I baptize you with water; but he who is mightier than I is coming, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie; he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire. His winnowing fork is in his hand, to clear his threshing floor, and to gather the wheat into his granary, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire. (Luke 3:16-17)

Death of St. John the Baptist

St. John the Baptist was imprisoned because he condemned the wrong deeds of Herod Antipas, the governor of Galilee. He was keeping his brother’s wife, Herodias as his wife. St. John the Baptist spoke against this wrong. Herod wanted to kill St. John the Baptist, but he could not do it since people considered St. John the Baptist as a prophet:

But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced before the company, and pleased Herod, so that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she might ask. Prompted by her mother, she said, "Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter." And the king was sorry; but because of his oaths and his guests he commanded it to be given; he sent and had John beheaded in the prison, and his head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, and she brought it to her mother. (Matthew 14:6-11)

31

Just as St. John the Baptist, we have to witness to the truth. Truthfulness is to work according to the conscience. We have to work according to truth and justice. We can win the confidence of others, if we are truthful.

Activity

1. Write three instances how St. John the Baptist fulfilled the work

of preparing the people to welcome Messiah.2. Write five examples that you can imitate from the life of St. John

the Baptist.3. Explain what truthfulness is and write an occasion that you were

truthful.

For Life

²² Let us work for truth and justice.²² Let us share what we have.

32

Mission of Lord Jesus

9.1 Picture: Baptism of Lord Jesus

Having got baptized from St. John the Baptist at Jordan River, Lord Jesus began his public life and ministry. According to St. Luke, at that moment the heaven was opened. The Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form, as a dove, and a voice came from heaven, “Thou art my beloved Son; with thee I am well pleased.”

Just as the Holy Spirit descended on Lord Jesus when He got baptized on Jordan River, the Holy Spirit descended on us on the day of our baptism. We too have been accepted as children of God.

After that wonderful incident at Jordan River, Lord Jesus got prepared for His ministry by prayer, fasting and overcoming temptations for forty days. St. Luke records it:

9

33

And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit for forty days in the wilderness, tempted by the devil. And he ate nothing in those days; and when they were ended, he was hungry. (Luke 4:1-2)

In the wilderness Lord Jesus overcame three temptations:

Jesus full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness, where for forty days he was tempted by the devil. He ate nothing at all during those days, and when they were over, he was famished. The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become a loaf of bread.” Jesus answered him, It is written, “One does not live by bread alone.”

Then the devil led him up and showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world. And the devil said to him, “To you I will give their glory and all this authority; for it has been given over to me, and I give it to anyone I please. If you, then, will worship me, it will all be yours.” Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘Worship the Lord your God, and serve only him.’ ”

Then the devil took him to Jerusalem, and placed him on the pinnacle of the temple, saying to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from there, for it is written, He will command his angles concerning you, to protect you’, and ‘On their hands they will bear up, so that you will not dash your foot against a stone.’ Jesus answered him, “It is said, ‘Do not put the Lord your God to test.” ’ (Luke 4:1-12)

34

Having overcome these temptations, Lord Jesus returned in the power of the Holy Spirit into Galilee. He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.

Sermon at Nazareth

Lord Jesus came to Nazareth, where He had been brought up; and He went to the synagogue, as His custom was, on the Sabbath day. And He stood up to read; and there was given to Him the book of the Prophet Isaiah. He opened the book and found the place where it was written about His ministry:

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord. (Luke 4:18-19)

According to the above quotation, it is clear that the aim of His mission was to bring the good to the poor, the captives, the oppressed and the blind, and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.

We too have to be faithful to our baptismal vocation and overcome the day-to-day temptations. We have to get ready for that by prayer. We have to help the mission as a community.

35

Activity

1. Name an instance when Lord Jesus’ divine sonship was revealed.2. Write the Scripture passage of Prophet Isaiah, quoted by Lord

Jesus in the synagogue at Nazareth.3. Name a temptation, faced by you and write how you overcame it.4. “Jesus, who overcame temptations, is an example to you, who are

a youth.” Write down the main points for a talk, based on Luke 4:1-13. (100 words are sufficient)

For Life

²² Be faithful to the baptismal vocation.²² Give the maximum support to bring the Good

News to others.²² Get energy from prayer to overcome

temptations.

36

Kingdom of God

Lord Jesus proclaimed the kingdom of God. The meaning of His words and deeds was the dawn of the kingdom of God. All are invited to inherit the kingdom of God. We have to work hard to win the kingdom of God. Lord Jesus taught the values of the kingdom of God by using parables:

²² Parable of the sower (Luke 8:5-8)²² Parables of the hidden treasure, pearl of great price and net (Luke 13:44-50)

²² Parable of the Sower

10.1 Picture: The Sower

10

Is to come under God’s reign

To discard sin and to live a life in grace

Is to live according to God’s will

To live in love, truth, justice and righteousness

Kingdom of God

37

This parable explains the obstacles on the way to the kingdom of God and the attitude that one should have towards the Word of God. We have to listen to the Word of God attentively. To the amount we are open to the Holy Spirit, the seed will grow.

The ground on which the seed fell

What happen to the

seed

Meaning of the parable

Seed that fell along the path

The birds devoured it.Seed, the Word of God, planted in the mind, is snatched by Satan.

Seed that fell on the rock

It grew up, but it withered away because there was no moisture.

Word of God is adhered for some time but when temptations come, it is forgotten and act contrary to it.

Seed that fell among thorns

The thorns grew with it and choked it.

One does not give fruit due to problems, love of wealth and harbouring pleasure.

Seed that fell into good soil

It grew, and yielded a hundredfold.

One hears the word with a pure heart and bears bring forth fruit with patience.

²² Parable of the Hidden Treasure

10.2 Picture: Hidden Treasure

38

The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up; then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field. (Matthew 13:44)

This parable teaches that we must be ready to give up everything that we have, if we want to inherit the kingdom of God. Treasure is a small hidden thing. Yet it is worth more than anything else. We have to keep in mind that it is not a large worldly kingdom. The kingdom of God cannot be valued.

²² Parable of the Pearl of Great Price

10.3 Picture: the Pearl of Great Price

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant in search of fine pearls, who, on finding one pearl of great value, went and sold all that he had and bought it. (Matthew 13:45-46)

39

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net which was thrown into the sea and gathered fish of every kind; when it was full, men drew it ashore and sat down and sorted the good into vessels but threw away the bad. So it will be at the close of the age. The angels will come out and separate the evil from the righteous, and throw them into the furnace of fire; there men will weep and gnash their teeth. (Matthew 13:47-50)

This parable shows the value of the kingdom of God. Therefore, the merchant sold all what he had and bought the invaluable pearl. In the same way, one who searches the kingdom has the challenge of sacrificing everything.

²² Parable of the Net

10.4 Picture: Net

40

This parable teaches that just as the fisherman drag the net full of fish to the shore and collect the good fish into vessels and throw the bad away, in the final judgement the evil will be separated from the righteous and they will be given their due punishment.

The Parables, found only in the Gospel of Luke

²² Parable of the Good Samaritan²² Parable of the Lost Son²² Parable of the rich man and Lazarus

ParableMessage

Parable of the Good SamaritanOne can enter the kingdom of God if one loves others irrespective of race, caste, religion, etc.

Parable of the Lost SonIf one repents for his sins and returns to God, God welcomes him and reinstall in the sonship of God.

Parable of the rich man and LazarusThose who live a luxurious life should not forget the poor. If they are to enter the kingdom of God, they should help the helpless. Our Christian duty is to develop our talents and work for the betterment of the others.

41

Activity

1. Name five Parables that teach about the kingdom values.2. Write one such parable in brief and explain its message.

For Life

²² Cultivate the values of the kingdom

of God

42

Miracles of Lord Jesus

Miracles are wonderful acts which cannot be done in natural circumstances.

There are four kinds of miracles, done by Lord Jesus

Nature Miracles: E.g. Calming of the storm

Healings: E.g. Healing of the crippled woman

Exorcisms: E.g. Cure of the Gerasene demoniac

Raising of the dead: E.g. Raising of the Jairus’ daughter

12

34

11.1 Picture: Miracles of Lord Jesus

11

43

1. Nature Miracles - Calming of the storm

One day he got into a boat with his disciples, and he said to them, "Let us go across to the other side of the lake." So they set out, and as they sailed he fell asleep. And a storm of wind came down on the lake, and they were filling with water, and were in danger. And they went and woke him, saying, "Master, Master, we are perishing!" And he awoke and rebuked the wind and the raging waves; and they ceased, and there was a calm. He said to them, "Where is your faith?" And they were afraid, and they marveled, saying to one another, "Who then is this, that he commands even wind and water, and they obey him?" (Luke 8:22-25)

This miracle confirms that

²² Jesus is the true Son of God²² Even nature obeys Him

Therefore, we have to believe in Lord Jesus and obey Him. We have to adhere to the Word of God and try to do the correct thing always. When our faith weakens, we must try to strengthen our faith.

2. Healings - Healing of the Crippled Woman on the Sabbath

Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. And there was a woman who had had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen years; she was bent over and could not fully straighten herself. And when Jesus saw her, he called her and said to her, "Woman, you are freed from your infirmity." And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made straight, and she praised God. (Luke 13:10-13)

44

This miracle shows that Lord Jesus understood the pain of that woman and helped her. In the same way we must be sensitive to the pain of others and eager to help them. Lord Jesus had mercy on her without any request from her.

We must pray for the physically and mentally sick people. So that God may heal them quickly.

3. Exorcisms - Cure of the Gerasene demoniac

Then they arrived at the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. And as he stepped out on land, there met him a man from the city who had demons; for a long time he had worn no clothes, and he lived not in a house but among the tombs. When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him, and said with a loud voice, "What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beseech you, do not torment me." For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (For many a time it had seized him; he was kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters, but he broke the bonds and was driven by the demon into the desert.) Jesus then asked him, "What is your name?" And he said, "Legion"; for many demons had entered him. And they begged him not to command them to depart into the abyss. Now a large herd of swine was feeding there on the hillside; and they begged him to let them enter these. So he gave them leave. Then the demons came out of the man and entered the swine, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned. When the herdsmen saw what had happened, they fled, and told it in the city and in the country. Then people went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus, and found the man from whom the demons had gone, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid. And those who had seen it told them how he who had been possessed with demons was healed. (Luke 8:26-36)

45

This shows that the demons were under the control of Lord Jesus, the Son of God and that He rescued man from evil spirits. We must pray to Lord Jesus, so that He may deliver us from such demonic powers. We must hand us over to the divine protection.

4. Raising of the dead - Raising of the Jairus’ daughter

Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him. And there came a man named Jairus, who was a ruler of the synagogue; and falling at Jesus' feet he besought him to come to his house, for he had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. As he went, the people pressed round him. While he was still speaking, a man from the ruler's house came and said, "Your daughter is dead; do not trouble the Teacher any more." But Jesus on hearing this answered him, "Do not fear; only believe, and she shall be well." And when he came to the house, he permitted no one to enter with him, except Peter and John and James, and the father and mother of the child. And all were weeping and bewailing her; but he said, "Do not weep; for she is not dead but sleeping." And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead. But taking her by the hand he called, saying, "Child, arise." And her spirit returned, and she got up at once; and he directed that something should be given her to eat. And her parents were amazed; but he charged them to tell no one what had happened. (Luke 8:40-42, 8:49-56)

For Lord Jesus, death is like a sleep. Lord Jesus will resurrect the dead, as one awakes a sleeping person. We have to live in this world with that faith.

46

Activity

1. Write an example to each of the category of the miracles,

done by Lord Jesus.2. Write an instance when you experienced a miracle.3. Write a prayer asking healing for those who are suffering

from various sicknesses.

For Life

²² Turn to God in faith, when you face challenges.²² Pray with confidence on God in face of difficulties.²² Listen to God’s voice and act accordingly in

day-to-day life.

47

The Eucharist

Lord Jesus instituted the Eucharist at the Last Supper. During the mass, we partake in the rite, done at the Last Supper. It is the centre of the Catholic liturgy. Just as at the Last Supper, Lord Jesus feeds us with His Body and Blood during the Mass. Living Jesus is really present in the Eucharist. Therefore, we have to receive

12.1 Picture: Last Supper

And when the hour came, he sat at table, and the apostles with him. And he took bread, and when he had given thanks he broke it and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me." And likewise the cup after supper, saying, "This cup which is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood. (Luke 22:14, 19-20)

12

48

12.2 Picture: We received Living Lord Jesus

Characteristics of the Eucharist

1. Sacrament2. Meal3. Sacrifice4. Covenant5. Thanksgiving6. Memorial

communion devotedly. When we go to receive communion and when we come back after receiving communion, our hands should be together with our fingers pointed upwards. After receiving communion we should kneel and pray a few minutes. Recall the day you received First Holy Communion. Compare and find out whether you have the same piety and reverence as that day.

49

Pre-figurations of the Sacrament of the Divine Eucharist

1. Melchizedek’s Sacrifice

Melchizedek, a priest-king was the first one to offer bread and wine to God as a sacrifice:

And Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine; he was priest of God Most High. And he blessed him and said, "Blessed be Abram by God Most High, maker of heaven and earth; and blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand!" And Abram gave him a tenth of everything. (Genesis 14:18-20)

2. Manna

God fed Israelites who were without any food and hungry in the wilderness (Exodus 16).

3. Paschal Meal

When the Israelites celebrated the Passover annually, they ate unleavened bread and drank wine from the cup.

4. Multiplication of Loaves

Multiplication of Loaves is also a pre-figuration of the Eucharist.

12.3 Picture: Multiplication of loaves

50

On their return the apostles told him what they had done. And he took them and withdrew apart to a city called Bethsaida. When the crowds learned it, they followed him; and he welcomed them and spoke to them of the kingdom of God, and cured those who had need of healing. Now the day began to wear away; and the twelve came and said to him, "Send the crowd away, to go into the villages and country round about, to lodge and get provisions; for we are here in a lonely place." But he said to them, "You give them something to eat." They said, "We have no more than five loaves and two fish--unless we are to go and buy food for all these people." For there were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, "Make them sit down in companies, about fifty each." And they did so, and made them all sit down. And taking the five loaves and the two fish he looked up to heaven, and blessed and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd. And all ate and were satisfied. And they took up what was left over, twelve baskets of broken pieces. (Luke 9:10-17)

Lord Jesus fed the crowds when they were hungry. We too should share our belongings when others are hungry. Lord Jesus invites us to do so.

Activity

1. Write three characteristics of the Eucharist.2. Write three pre-figurations of the Eucharist.3. Write the miracle of multiplication of loaves in your words.4. Write three good things that you do after receiving the

Eucharist.

For Life

²² Live the Eucharistic values in your lives. Pray

for that intention to the living Lord Jesus.

51

Preparation to Receive Holy

Communion

Methush : I couldn’t come to last Sunday Mass. Therefore, I am unable to receive Eucharist today.

Sephan : I also didn’t come. Yet I’ll receive Eucharist. It is useless to come to Mass, if we don’t receive Communion.

Teacher : Who heard this, says: Come here, children. It is a sin if you don’t come to Sunday Mass. Parish Priest hears confession for 10 minutes before every Mass. You can confess at that time and receive forgiveness. After that, both of you can receive Holy Communion.

Methush : Let us make a good confession before mass. Can you remember that we were taught that we must receive communion with a pure heart. When we sin, our hearts get impure. Then we have to receive absolution.

Sephan : After all, I haven’t done anything wrong?

Methush : Why not? Teacher said that failure to come to Sunday Mass is a sin. It is a sin against the third commandment of the Decalogue.

Sephan : I’m hungry. I have some short eats. Come, let us eat.

Methush : We can eat one hour prior to mass and not otherwise. Don’t eat now. Eat after Mass.

Sephan : Don’t you eat on any day before Mass? I didn’t eat only when I received First Holy Communion.

Methush : I eat one hour before mass. Otherwise I don’t eat. Its meaning is that we are hungry for Eucharist. Physical hunger is a sign of spiritual hunger.

13

52

Sephan : Because of you, today I learnt a good lesson. Let us go quickly and confess our sins.

State of Grace (Spiritual Preparation)

State of Grace means that we are free of sins before receiving Holy Communion. According to St. Paul this is very essential. Therefore, he says:

Whoever, therefore, eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of profaning the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man examine himself, and so eat of the bread and drink of the cup. For anyone who eats and drinks without discerning the body eats and drinks judgment upon himself. That is why many of you are weak and ill, and some have died. (1 Corinthians 11:27-30)

If one commits a grave sin, he should confess before receiving Holy Communion. If one commits a venial sin, he can have absolution at the penitential rite of the Mass. If one, who has committed a grave sin, does not have the opportunity before Mass to confess his sins before a priest, he can receive communion with a firm determination to make a confession at the first chance that he gets to make a confession.

Fasting for One Hour (Physical Preparation)

One who is to receive Holy Communion is expected to fast at least one hour. Therefore, he is to abstain from all sorts of food and drinks, except water and medicine. Those who are aged, sick and those who look after sick are exempted from this one hour fast. If one is willing, he can fast even more than one hour.

One can receive Holy Communion outside Mass due to some reasonable reasons, such as sickness, old age, unavailability of priest to say Mass. If one attends more than one mass, he can receive Holy Communion twice, if and only if he participates throughout the second Mass. If one gets ill and a priest comes to give him the sacrament of anointing, he can receive Holy Communion for the second time even outside Mass.

53

Activity

1. What is the meaning of “state of grace” to receive Holy

Communion.2. How long one should fast to receive Holy Communion?

For LifeReceive Holy Communion with due preparation.

54

Sacrament of Confirmation

Come, Holy Spirit, Creator blest, and in our souls take up Thy rest; come with Thy grace and heavenly aid to fill the hearts which Thou hast made. O comforter, to Thee we cry, O heavenly gift of God Most High, O fount of life and fire of love, and sweet anointing from above.

14.1 Picture: Confirmation

Confirmation is the sacrament in which the Holy Spirit is given to those already baptized in order to make them strong and mature Christians and soldiers of Jesus Christ.

14

55

But as he considered this, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit; (Matthew 1:20)

Confirmation in the History of Salvation

The following words are used in the Old Testament to denote the “Holy Spirit”:

³³ The Spirit

³³ The Spirit of God

³³ Holy Spirit

Then the LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to him, and took some of the spirit that was upon him and put it upon the seventy elders; (Numbers 11:25)

The earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and the Spirit of God was moving over the face of the waters. (Genesis 1:2)

Do not cast me away from your presence, and do not take your holy spirit from me. (Psalm 51:11)

Holy Spirit in the Life of Lord Jesus

Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit:

And the angel said to her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; (Luke 1:35)

56

God gave Holy Spirit abundantly to Lord Jesus. Therefore, He received power to do miracles and to preach:

And when Jesus was baptized, he went up immediately from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and alighting on him; and lo, a voice from heaven, saying, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.” (Matthew 3:16-17)

And John bore witness, “I saw the Spirit descend as a dove from heaven, and it remained on him. I myself did not know him; but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.” (John 1:32-34)

For he whom God has sent utters the words of God, for it is not by measure that he gives the Spirit; (John 3:34)

Apostles Received Holy Spirit on Easter Sunday

And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, “Receive the Holy Spirit. (John 20:22)

Lord Jesus Christ appeared to the apostles on Easter Sunday and He reactivated them. As we receive Holy Spirit on the day of our Baptism, the apostles received Holy Spirit on that day to be born again.

57

Apostles give the Holy Spirit to Others

The following Scripture passages show that there were two rites to confer Baptism and Confirmation from the time of Apostles:

Now when the apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent to them Peter and John, who came down and prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Spirit; for it had not yet fallen on any of them, but they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands on them and they received the Holy Spirit. (Acts 8:14-17)

Full Outpouring of Holy Spirit on the Pentecost Day

14.2 Picture - Descent of Holy Spirit on the Apostles

And suddenly a sound came from heaven like the rush of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared to them tongues as of fire, distributed and resting on each one of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. (Acts 2:2-4)

58

On hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Spirit came on them; and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. (Acts 19:5-6)

… with instruction about ablutions, the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment. (Heb 6:2)

Since you are going to receive Holy Spirit, pray to Him daily, ask His help constantly and experience Him. By praying, we can receive the Holy Spirit. We become mature Christians by receiving the Sacrament of Confirmation.

Activity

1. Write the changes that took place in the apostles,

filled with the Holy Spirit.2. Write a prayer asking the power of the Holy Spirit.

For LifePray constantly asking the power of the Holy Spirit.

59

Preparation to Receive the Sacrament of Confirmation

By the Sacrament of Confirmation, one gets strength to overcome the challenges and difficulties in living a Christian life. It is due to activation of the power of the Holy Spirit in a special way within the person who received the sacrament. In order to receive powers of the Holy Spirit, one has to receive the sacrament with due preparation.

Requirements, necessary to receive the Sacrament

The candidate should

1. Have received Baptism2. Have reached the age of reason3. Be in a state of grace (i.e. free from sin. Therefore the candidate should

make a good confession )4. Have received due catechism5. Have enthusiasm to receive the Sacrament

The Effects of Confirmation

³³ It roots us more deeply in the divine filiation which makes us cry, "Abba! Father!"³³ It unites us more firmly to Christ.³³ It increases the gifts of the Holy Spirit in us.³³ It renders our bond with the Church more perfect.³³ It gives us a special strength of the Holy Spirit to spread and defend the faith

by word and action as true witnesses of Christ, to confess the name of Christ boldly, and never to be ashamed of the Cross.³³ It imprints on the soul an indelible spiritual mark.

15

60

The Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit

Wisdom ¡ By detaching us from the world, makes us relish and love only the things of heaven

Counsel ¡Enables us to see and choose correctly what will help most to the glory of God and our own salvation.

Fortitude ¡ Is the virtue that allows us to overcome fear and to remain steady in our will in the face of obstacles.

Knowledge ¡ By this gift we are able to know the way to heaven avoiding the evil.

Piety ¡ Is the moral virtue by which a person is disposed to render to God the worship and service he deserves.

Fear of the Lord ¡ - We give due respect to God and avoid what is not pleasing to Him

Understanding ¡ Allows us to grasp the very essence of the truths of the Catholic Faith.

Twelve Fruits of the Holy Spirit

1. Charity2. Joy3. Peace4. Patience5. Kindness6. Goodness7. Generosity8. Gentleness9. Faithfulness10. Modesty11. Self-control12. Chastity

61

Duties of those who received Confirmation

1. Broaden one’s knowledge of God in order to deepen one’s faith2. Have a deep love for Christ and maintain it3. Witness to the love of Christ whenever demanded4. To make every effort to sanctify the world with Christ5. As a mature Christian, Witness I. By word II.By deed

Minister of Confirmation

1. The Bishop: The ordinary minister of Confirmation2. The Parish Priest: At adult baptism3. A priest who has special permission from the Bishop4. Any priest: In danger of death

Activity

1. Write the five requirements to receive Confirmation.2. Name the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit.

For LifeBe an example as an adult member of the Church.

62

Rite of Confirmation

Look at this picture and recall a ceremony of Confirmation, which you have attended.

The Mass of Confirmation

The Introductory Rite

Procession proceeds to the Church. The candidates walk in front of the Bishop. The introductory rite is like that of a Sunday Mass.

The Liturgy of the Word

This includes First Reading, Responsorial Psalm, Second Reading, Gospel Acclamation, Gospel, followed by the homily, nourishing the candidates and the congregation.

16.1 Picture: Giving Confirmation

16

63

Presentation of the Candidates

The Parish Priest requests from the Bishop to confer the Sacrament of Confirmation to the candidates. The Bishop inquires from the Parish Priest whether the candidates are suitable to receive the Sacrament. After the Parish Priest says that they are eligible, the Bishop announces that they have been chosen to confer the Sacrament.

Renewal of Baptismal Promises

The candidates renew with their free choice the baptismal promises, given by the parents and the godparents at the Baptism, i.e., renounce the Satan and profess their faith and make a firm decision to live a life according to Christian calling and become witness. They renew their baptismal promise by extending their right hand as they are making a vow.

Bishop extends his hands over the candidates and pray asking the gifts of the Holy Spirit

This rite takes an important place. In the prayer, the Bishop prays “by water and the Holy Spirit you freed your sons and daughters from sin and gave them new life. Send your Holy Spirit upon them to be their Helper and Guide. Give them the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of right judgment and courage, the spirit of knowledge and reverence. Fill them with the spirit of wonder and awe in your presence.” The Anointing with Chrism

The Bishop signs the candidate with the perfumed oil, chrism. The godparents place their right hand on the latter’s shoulder. The Bishop makes the sign of the cross with chrism on the forehead of the one to be confirmed, by saying: “(Name), be sealed with the gifts of the Holy Spirit.” This is the external sign of Confirmation. Thereby he receives the indelible character on the soul, and become a soldier of Christ. Sometimes the Bishop may gently slap the candidates. It symbolizes that he is bound to witness to Christ amidst challenges that he faces and that he is bound to fulfill his mission.

64

General Intercessions

The general intercessions or prayers of the faithful invoke God’s blessing on the confirmed.

Offertory

The confirmed offer gifts by offering themselves to God.

Activity

1. Make a booklet with the Rite of Confirmation.

For LifeStudy the Rite of Confirmation

65

Worship of One God

Having read the above Bible quotation, name the following pictures.

One day St. Augustine was walking on the beach, while he was reflecting and trying to understand the mystery of the Holy Trinity. At that time he noticed that there was a child, who had dug a pit on the seashore and he was fetching water from the sea by a seashell and pouring to the pit. St. Augustine wanted to know what the child was doing and inquired about it. He answered that he wanted to fill that small

Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (Matthew 28:19)

17

66

pit with all the water of the sea by that small seashell. St. Augustine laughed and said that it was impossible. The child said to St. Augustine that he was trying to understand what cannot be understood and the child disappeared. This shows that it is impossible to understand infinite God by the mind of man, a finite being.

Worship of One God According to the Bible

And the devil took him up, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, and said to him, “To you I will give all this authority and their glory; for it has been delivered to me, and I give it to whom I will. If you, then, will worship me, it shall all be yours.” And Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.’” (Luke 4:5-8)

This Bible quotation shows that Jesus is teaching that in accordance with the Word of God, we have to worship God alone. Lord Jesus insists that we should not be slaves to power or wealth. Instead we have to worship one and only God.

You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; you shall not bow down to them or serve them; for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and the fourth generation of those who hate me. (Exodus 20:3-5)

Although there are three persons in the Holy Trinity, there is only one God. He is a Triune God. This is the Catholic faith. This can be understood only in faith.

67

We have to worship only to Triune God. The first commandment of the Decalogue, found in the Book of Exodus in the Old Testament also testifies to the worship of one God. The central mystery in the life of the Christian is the Holy Trinity. The incarnation of the Son of God shows the divine love for man. The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are One God. After Jesus, God the Father sent the Holy Spirit. With the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit receives the same worship and glory.

Duties of the Triune God

The Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are assigned different duties.

Duties of God, the Father

God the Father is the one who created the world and govern it. This is clear from the creation story, found in the Book of Genesis.

And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. (Genesis 1:31)

Duties of God, the Son

He is the one who saved the world. By the first sin of disobedience, Jesus came to this world to save mankind according to the will of God. By His passion and death, he saved man from sin. Through that we receive salvation and forgiveness.

Duties of the Holy Spirit

The Holy Spirit sanctifies the world. He is active in all those who have received the Baptism and He sanctifies all of them. Therefore, those who have received the Baptism are temples of the Holy Spirit.

68

Triune God and Baptism

We have been baptised in the name of the Holy Trinity: “(Name), I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” Representing you, your parents and godparents promised to believe in the Triune God:

Celebrant: Do you believe in God, the Father almighty, creator of heaven and

earth?

All: I do.

Celebrant: Do you believe in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, who was born

of the Virgin Mary, was crucified, died, and was buried, rose from the dead, and is now seated at the right hand of the Father?

All: I do.

Celebrant: Do you believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy catholic Church, the

communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting?

All: I do.

The Christian family is a communion of persons, a sign and image of the communion of the Father and the Son in the Holy Spirit. In the procreation and education of children it reflects the Father's work of creation. It is called to partake of the prayer and sacrifice of Christ. Daily prayer and the reading of the Word of God strengthen it in charity. The Christian family has an evangelizing and missionary task. (CCC 2205)

Triune God and the Family

69

Services in the Family

Just as each person of the Holy Trinity has His respective duties, each member of the family has his / her respective duties. The Christian family has to live in peace and harmony. Just as Lord Jesus, each one of the family has to love one another. Just as the Holy Trinity, all members of the family have to live a community life. Each one has to do his / her duties with fine cooperation. The sign of the Holy Trinity on earth is the Christian family.

Activity

1. Write the duties of each of the persons of the Holy Trinity

separately.2. Explain in brief the mystery of the Holy Trinity.3. Write a speech in brief how the love of the Holy Trinity can

be shown within the family.

For LifeLet us worship only one God.

70

Life in One God

During the reign of Antiochus IV Epiphanes, the mother and her two children were forced to do the gentile rituals. Since they were adherents of the faith in one God, they rejected those gentile rituals. Therefore, they were martyred. Before their death, they were encouraged by their mother, saying “I carried you nine months in my womb, and nursed you for three years, and have reared you and brought you up to this point in your life, and have taken care of you.” Yet you belong to God. Therefore, “accept death, so that in God's mercy I may get you back again with your brothers.” God will meet you on the day of judgment (2 Maccabees 7).

You can understand more about this incident, if you read the whole Bible text. This insists that we should not be worshippers of idolatry, and that God gives strength to face challenges.

Idolatry is not pleasing to God. They are against the first commandment. Therefore, baptized Christians should do away with such acts.

Advices against idolatry as prescribed by the Holy Bible

When the LORD your God cuts off before you the nations whom you go in to dispossess, and you dispossess them and dwell in their land, take heed that you be not ensnared to follow them, after they have been destroyed before you, and that you do not inquire about their gods, saying, ‘How did these nations serve their gods? that I also may do likewise.’ You shall not do so to the LORD your God; for every abominable thing which the LORD hates they have done for their gods; for they even burn their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods. (Deuteronomy 12:29-31)

This Scripture passage advises how Israelites should live in the Promised Land. God advised them to shun away from Canaanite idolatry:

18

71

This also shows that God rejects idolatry. We have to do away with things which are not pleasing to God. Therefore, we have to worship God alone. Israelites became slaves in Babylon, because they engaged in idolatry.

Do not turn to idols or make for yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God. (Leviticus 19:4)

The following passage shows that God rejects images, used in other religions:

If a prophet arises among you, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives you a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder which he tells you comes to pass, and if he says, ‘Let us go after other gods,’ which you have not known, ‘and let us serve them,’ you shall not listen to the words of that prophet or to that dreamer of dreams; for the LORD your God is testing you, to know whether you love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul. You shall walk after the LORD your God and fear him, and keep his commandments and obey his voice, and you shall serve him and cleave to him. (Deuteronomy 13:1-4)

Son of man, these men have set up idols in their hearts and put wicked stumbling blocks before their faces. Should I let them inquire of me at all? Therefore speak to them and tell them, ‘This is what the Sovereign LORD says: When any of the Israelites set up idols in their hearts and put a wicked stumbling block before their faces and then go to a prophet, I the LORD will answer them myself in keeping with their great idolatry. I will do this to recapture the hearts of the people of Israel, who have all deserted me for their idols. Therefore say to the people of Israel, ‘This is what the Sovereign LORD says: Repent! Turn from your idols and renounce all your detestable practices! (Ezekiel 14:3-6)

72

According to the above passage, one should not listen to the words of the false prophets and dreamer of dreams. We have to love God with all our soul and with all our mind and with all our strength. We have to observe the commandments of God, listen to His voice and worship to Him alone.

We have to be cautious not only about idolatry, but also about constant temptations against our faith. It is not suitable to give God’s place to worldly things, such as money, power, wealth, etc. We cannot love both God and mammon. The martyrs had to sacrifice their lives because they did not worship any other things except God.

Superstitious and idolatrous practices are against the first commandment. Such are using charms, amulets, spells, charmed oils, charmed threads, devil dancing, wearing talisman, belief in auspicious times, light reading, consulting spirits, believes in signs of good and bad luck, believing in omens, dreams and such like fooleries.

We have to do the following if we are to come closer to God:

²² We have to worship only one God.²² We have to develop our relationship with God through worship of one God.²² We have to get rid of idolatrous practices and safeguard others from them too.²² We have to depend on God alone and face the challenges in life.²² We should not believe that there is spells of devils, charms, etc.²² All what we have in this world can be compared to dust when they are compared

with heavenly gifts.

Activity

1. Write five things that you can do as a person who worships only

one God.2. Write five superstitious practices that you have to do away in

day-to-day life.3. Make a poster with the title “Shun away superstitious practices.”

For LifeBelieve in one God and avoid all the superstitious practices.

73

Honouring Saints

19.1 Picture: St. Anthony

1. Write three information about St. Anthony.2. What is the most important example that you can imitate from him?

If we consider a person or a thing other than God as divine and worship him or it, then it is idolatry. Picture and statues bring to our mind the persons, depicted by them. Those pictures and statues are unable to perform miracles. When a statue, a medal or a thing is blessed, it becomes holy. Therefore, they have to be used with honour. The saints have lived a life, pleasing to God. They have witnessed to God. When we respect a statue or a picture, it means that we respect the person, depicted by it. The purpose of a statue is to recall that person to our mind. When we respect a person, pleasing to God, we have to keep in mind that we worship God. We have to respect saints, because of their exemplary lives. Therefore we pray to them and respect their statues and relics. We can imitate their lives and live a life pleasing to God.

19

74

“If I touch even His garments, I shall be made well.” was the belief of the woman who touched the garment of Jesus. This means that she considered that His garment was sacred.

Use of Images in the Old Testament

²² Cherubs (angels) were used to beautify the arch of the covenant (Exodus

25:18-22)²² Bronze serpent was made so that one may look at it may be healed (Numbers

21:8-9). All these were made in accordance with God’s commandment.

Saints

You shall not make for yourself a graven image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; you shall not bow down to them or serve them; for I the LORD your God am a “jealous God”, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and the fourth generation of those who hate me. (Exodus 20:4-5)

God name Himself as a “jealous God.” He is jealous of other gods, not of saints. It is because the saints are not rivals. Other gods are the rivals of God. They distract the people from God. It is the saints who lead the faithful towards God. They have lived exemplary lives that can be imitated. They are already in heaven. They are in God’s presence. They pray for us.

In the light of the lives of the saints, you can do the following:

²² Give the first place to God in all your activities.²² Give priority to Word of God, and read and meditate daily the Word of God.²² Just as saints mediate for others, we too should try our best to help others.²² Read the autobiographies of the saints and imitate them.

75

²² Just as the saints lived according to God’s commandments, we too should do

the same.²² When the feast of the Church is celebrated, attend all the novenas and masses

without failure.

Activity

1. Make a dialogue about veneration of the saints.2. Write in summary about the life of a saint.3. Write three examples that you can imitate from

that saint.

For LifeLet us imitate saints.

76

Honour God’s Name

You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain; for the LORD will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain. (Exodus 20:7)

Read this scripture passage and meditate on it for a while, and try to understand what is implied.

God is the holiest One. He reveals His name to those who trust on Him. His name too is very holy. Hence His name has to be used with due reverence and respect. It should not be used for anything other than in blessing, praising, praying or glorifying Him. The second commandment forbids the abuse of God’s name and every improper use of His name. When we pronounce His name, it should be done devotedly and with respect.

Teachings of the Old Testament

You shall fear the LORD your God; you shall serve him and cleave to him, and by his name you shall swear. (Deuteronomy 10:20)

But the king shall rejoice in God; all who swear by him shall glory; for the mouths of liars will be stopped. (Psalm 63:11)

20

77

These Biblical quotations show that the Old Testament consents in swearing.

Lord Jesus’ Teaching

But I say to you, Do not swear at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God, or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. And do not swear by your head, for you cannot make one hair white or black. Let what you say be simply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’; anything more than this comes from evil. (Matthew 5:34-37)

This Scripture passage shows that the Lord Jesus condemns swearing.

Teachings of St. Paul

But I call God to witness against me—it was to spare you that I refrained from coming to Corinth. (1 Corinthians 1:23)

In what I am writing to you, before God, I do not lie! (Galatians 1:20)

78

Church’s Teaching on Swearing

One can swear in a serious matter, and when demanded by law or higher authority. When one does so, he should be very sure that he proclaims the truth. If one gives false promises, it is a breach of the second commandment.

The eighth commandment of the Decalogue is “You shall not bear false witness against your neighbour.” According to this commandment also it is a sin to say a lie. If you do not know something with certainty, you are not expected to stand for it.

Church’s Teaching on Vows

Vow is a deliberate promise, made to God to do something extra that pleases God. Therefore a vow should be made after due consideration. The non fulfilment of a vow could be a serious wrong.

When you make a vow to the LORD, your God, you shall not delay in fulfilling it; for the LORD, your God, will surely require it of you and you will be held guilty. (Deuteronomy 23:22)

Today a vow is similar to a transaction or bribe. It is like: “if you give me something, I will do something in return.” A vow is not a transaction, done with God. It is giving back what is due to God. If we do it with that intention, it is great. In fulfilling a vow, the intention of the one who made the vow is very important. If one fulfils the vow as an act of gratitude, happiness, praise or faith, it is admirable.

Our Duties

²² Use of divine name with due respect²² Fulfilment of the promises, given to others so that we may be faithful to our

promises.

79

Activity

1. Write the second commandment according to

Exodus 20:7.2. Write an article to the wallpaper on “God’s

name is great.”

For LifeUse God’s name with due respect and honour.

80

Keep Sunday Holy

Six days shall work be done, but the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to the LORD; (Exodus 31:15)

God created the world in six days, and He rested on the seventh day. The man, who works for six days, should rest on the seventh day. We should spend this day as an act of gratitude to God, who created and saved us. We must spend this day in a more religious way. He should give more time to worship God and to do good works.

The Catholics keep the Sunday holy by worshipping God. The source and summit of all Catholic worship is Sunday Mass.

According to the Jewish tradition, on the Sabbath day, Jews flocked to the synagogues and shared the Word of God. The New Testament testifies that Jesus and His disciples respected this tradition (Mark 6:1-6).

The holy Catholic Church celebrates the paschal mystery during the Sunday Mass.

Sunday

²² Jesus’ resurrection (Luke 24:1-12).²² Appearances of the Risen Lord Jesus.

¡¡ Appearance to Mary Magdalene (John 20:11-18)¡¡ Appearance to disciples (John 20:19-23)¡¡ Appearance to St. Thomas (John 20:24-29)²² Pentecost (Acts 2).

The third commandment shows us its importance in the following teaching:

21

81

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall labour, and do all your work; but the seventh day is a sabbath to the LORD your God; in it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or your daughter, your manservant, or your maidservant, or your cattle, or the sojourner who is within your gates; (Exodus 20:8-10)

Accordingly, we have to fulfil our Christian duty of worshiping God. Therefore, we have to attend Sunday Mass on that day. On Sunday, we must participate throughout the Mass. In other words, we should participate in the Mass from the entrance hymn to the final hymn.

It is a must that we should attend the Sunday Mass. One is exempted from it, if he is seriously ill or if he looks after a sick person. If one neglects this duty wilfully, he commits a grave sin. Even though there is no catechism class during the school vacations, one should go to Sunday Mass. If we go on a picnic on a Sunday, we should make it a point to attend Sunday Mass even on the way.

Besides, when we attend the Sunday Mass, we partake in the community celebration of the Eucharist and we show our loyalty and the relationship that we have with Lord Jesus Christ and the Church. Thereby we renew the covenant membership. As a result, we witness to holiness of God and hope of salvation. And we are strengthened by the Holy Spirit as a people of God.

The things that can be done to keep Sunday holy:

²² Having participated mass right from the beginning, we have to receive Holy

Communion.²² Having read day’s readings, we have to meditate on it.²² Attend catechism classes²² Do charitable works as much as possible²² Visit the sick²² Attend “Sramadana” programmes in the Church or village and other activities

which cater to the common good of the society²² Attend various societies in the Church²² Help relatives and friends who are in need.

82

Activity

1. According to Exodus 31:15, in whose honour, we spend

the Sunday?2. Write the third commandment of the Decalogue.3. What is our Sunday obligation?4. Write five things that you do to make Sunday holy.

For LifeAttend Sunday Mass and make it holy.

In this way, we are called to spend the Lord’s Day holy and we are to experience happiness in the Lord.

83

Divine Worship

Having gathered together, the sublime worship that the Christian community gives to God through Christ is Divine Worship (Liturgy). His Holiness Pope Pius xii in his encyclical, Mediator Dei defines liturgy in the following words:

The sacred liturgy is the public worship which our Redeemer as Head of the Church renders to the Father, as well as the worship which the community of the faithful renders to its Founder, and through Him to the heavenly Father. It is, in short, the worship rendered by the Mystical Body of Christ in the entirety of its Head and members.

The Mystical Body of Christ is the Church. Its head is Christ. Its members are those who have been baptized and become the members of the Church, i.e. we. Head controls the whole body, all the parts of the body. In the same way, Lord Jesus Christ, the head of the mystical body leads us, the parts of the body. Lord Jesus Christ invites us to make our whole life a divine worship by leading a life pleasing to God.

No 07 of the Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy of the Second Vatican Council analyse liturgy in the following manner.

The liturgy is considered as an exercise of the priestly office of Jesus Christ. In the liturgy the whole public worship is performed by the Mystical Body of Jesus Christ (the Church), that is, by the Head and His members.

Lord Jesus performed a public worship on the Calvary between the sky and the earth. In that act He carried forward His priestly office. In the divine worship, we as the members of the Church, worship God through Jesus Christ.

22

84

The word, “Liturgy” comes from the Greek word, “Leitourgia.” It is made up of two words, namely, “Laos” and “Ergon.”

Laos = People

Ergon = work, service

Accordingly, in the early days, by the word “leitourgia” it meant a work done for the benefit of the people without an enumeration. Greeks meant many things by this word, such as, work done by a slave to his master, a charitable work, done for the benefit of a friend, official duties, carried out by those holding high ranks in the society, etc.

Therefore, we should make it a point to give ourselves as Lord Jesus and thereby make our whole life a liturgy. Hence, I will:

²² Become a member of various associations in the Parish and the school and help

the helpless.²² Be sensitive to the pains of the others and help them.²² Be happy not only in my achievements but also that of others.²² Be kind to the weak and the marginalized.²² Share with others what I have.²² Help in liturgical activities.

Activity

1. Define “Liturgy” according to the No 07 of the Constitution on

the Sacred Liturgy.2. What is the name of the encyclical of His Holiness, Pope Pius

XII on Liturgy?3. What are the two words that make the word, “Leitourgia?”4. Write three instances that you sacrificed yourself for the benefit

of others.

For LifeBe happy by being sacrificing yourself for the benefit of other.

85

Components of Divine

Worship

We learnt that the sublime worship that the Christian community offer to God, the creator is Divine Worship (Liturgy). Liturgy is made up of three components:

1. Holy Mass2. Sacraments3. Liturgy of the Hours

Holy Mass

The Mass is the most important and sacred act of worship in the Catholic Church. Paschal mystery of Lord Jesus Christ is celebrated during the Mass. The faithful who attend Mass take part in a very important celebration.

Holy Mass is made up of two parts:

1. The Liturgy of the Word2. The Liturgy of the Eucharist

23.1 Picture: Holy Mass is being celebrated

The Liturgy of the Word consists of First Reading, Responsorial Psalm, Second Reading, Alleluia, Proclamation of the Gospel, homily that guide to lead a good life, Creed and the Prayers of the Faithful.

23

86

The Liturgy of the Eucharist consists of Eucharistic Prayer, Doxology Our Father, Kiss of Peace, Breaking of the Bread and the Distribution of the Communion. In performing all these liturgical acts, the Church uses signs, symbols, prayers and rites, approved by the Church. It is our duty to attend the Holy Mass on all Sundays and all days of obligation. Besides, we are called to attend Mass even on week days whenever possible.

Sacraments

23.2 Picture: Giving Holy Communion

A sacrament is an external sign of inward grace, instituted by Jesus Christ. Through sacraments we meet Risen Lord Jesus. There are seven sacraments. They are Baptism, Eucharist, Confirmation, Confession, Anointing of the Sick, Ordination and Matrimony. All these flow from the paschal mystery of Lord Jesus Christ.

When we receive these sacraments with due spiritual and physical preparation, we receive many graces.

87

Liturgy of the Hours

23.3 Picture: Praying the Liturgy of Hours

The official prayer of the Church is the Liturgy of Hours. In short, it can be described as a prayer of praise, said by people of God as a community at different times of the day (hours of the day), using Psalms of the Psalter and other Biblical hymns. Since it is prayed at specific times of the day, i.e. in the morning, at midday, in the evening and at night, it is called “Liturgy of the Hours.” By this official prayer, the priests, religious and the clergy perform their priestly duties, entrusted at Baptism.

All times belong to God. Therefore, God is praised at various hours of the day. The priests and the religious are bound to pray the Liturgy of the Hours daily. The laity come together to pray the Liturgy of the Hours on the previous day of every Church feast.

We have to participate meaningfully in the Holy Mass, the Sacraments and the Liturgy of the Hours. Therefore, we have to participate devotedly and meaningfully in the Holy Mass from the right beginning to the end of the Holy Mass.

Besides, we have to receive the Sacraments with full preparation and understanding at the due age.

Not only that, we have to praise God, the Creator of the universe daily by the Liturgy of the Hours. Although we cannot do so daily, at least we must do so on the eve of the Church feast.

By Holy Mass, the Sacraments and the Liturgy of the Hours, we praise and worship God.

88

Activity

1. How many components are there in the Liturgy?2. Mention tow main parts of the Holy mass.3. Name those components and write in brief a description

of each.4. Write five things that you can do to participate in those

components of liturgy meaningfully.

For LifeReceive the Sacraments at the due age.

89

Holy Mass

ChorusSing to the mountains, sing to the seaRaise your voices, lift your heartsThis is the day the Lord has madeLet all the earth rejoice

I will give thanks to you, my LordYou have answered my pleaYou have saved my soul from deathYou are my strength and my song

This is the day the Lord has madeLet us be glad and rejoiceDeath has lost and all is lifeSing of the glory of God

I. When is this hymn sung?II. To do what this hymn invites?III. What is your response to that invitation?

The centre of Christian life is Holy Mass. We remember in the Holy Mass in a sacramental way sacrifice of Lord Jesus Christ to God on the cross of the Calvary. Therefore, we have to attend the Holy Mass and partake in sacrifice on the cross. It builds up the relationship between God and us.

Holy Mass consists of some rites. If we are aware of them, we can participate in the Mass meaningfully. Therefore, we are going to study about them in this lesson.

Order of the Holy Mass

1. Introductory Rite 4. Liturgy of the Eucharist2. Liturgy of the Word 5. Sending away for the Mission3. Preparation of the Altar

24

90

1. Introductory Rite

24.1 Picture: Introductory Rite

This rite begins with the entrance hymn. It has many mini rites:1. Entrance Hymn and the Procession2. Greeting3. Introduction4. Penitential Rite5. Kyrie6. Glory to God7. Collect

2. Liturgy of the Word

1. First Reading2. Responsorial Psalm3. Second Reading 4. Gospel Acclamation (Alleluia)5. Gospel6. Homily7. Creed8. Prayers of the Faithful

24.2 Picture: Reading the Word

of God

91

3. Preparation of the Altar

1. Offertory Procession and Preparation of the Altar2. Prayer over the Offerings

24.3 Picture: Offertory Procession

4. Liturgy of the Eucharist

1. Eucharistic Prayer and Doxology2. The Lord's Prayer, Sign of

Peace, Breaking of Bread3. Communion4. Prayer after Communion

24.4 Picture: Giving Holy Communion

5. Sending away for the Mission

Having examined our conscience, we listen to the Word of God and get nourishment from the Body and Blood of Lord Jesus Christ. Having changed our lives, we are sent to give Lord Jesus Christ the world. Hence we have the duty of living in accordance with God’s Word and to make Lord Jesus alive in the world.24.5 Picture: Sending away for the Mission

92

Activity

1. Name the five rites of the Holy Mass.2. Name the rite, to which each the following belongsi. Final Blessingii. Prayer over Giftsiii. Creediv. Gloriav. Eucharistic Prayer3. Write three things that you can do to attend Holy Mass meaningfully.4. Having find out the Readings of the Mass from the Parish Priest,

make a booklet, having the followings:i. Introduction to the Holy Massii. Prayers of the Faithfuliii. Hymns, to be sung during the Holy Mass

For LifeHaving nourished by the Word of God and Eucharist, proclaim Lord Jesus Christ to the world by your exemplary life.

93

Other Liturgical

Celebrations

Edmund : Father, Christopher has a question.

Priest : Christopher, what is the problem?

Christopher : Father, yesterday our grandmother came home after a pilgrimage. She

gave me a necklace with a medal. When I was about to wear it, my mother asked me not to wear it without being blessed. Further she said, let us get blessed the statue and the necklace with the medal, when we go to next Sunday Mass. Father, why do we get blessed those things?

Priest : Son, it is the custom of the Church that we use religious articles after they are blessed. Such blessings are called, “Other Liturgical Celebrations.”

Christopher : Father, what do you mean by “Other Liturgical Celebrations?”

Priest : I’ll explain it in tomorrow’s catechism class.

Other Liturgical Celebrations are instituted for the sanctification of certain ministries of the Church, certain states of life, a great variety of circumstances in Christian life, and the use of many things helpful to man. Other Liturgical Celebrations include blessing of people, religious objects, meals and places, wearing of medals, revering relics, etc.

Characteristics of Other Liturgical Celebrations

²² The administration of Other Liturgical Celebrations is reserved to bishops,

priests, or deacons.²² Sometimes they are administered by the lay people.²² Certain blessings have a lasting importance because they consecrate persons to

God or reserve objects and places for liturgical use.²² They always include a prayer, often accompanied by a specific sign, such as the

laying on of hands, the sign of the cross or the sprinkling of holy water.

25

94

²² They signify effects, particularly of a spiritual nature, which are obtained

through the intercession of the Church. (C.C.C. 1667-1690)

They can also respond to the needs, culture, and special history of the Christian people of a particular region or time. Some of the Other Liturgical Celebrations are:

Blessings

²² Blessing of people, religious objects, meals and places are Other Liturgical

Celebrations.

The Veneration of Relics

The religious sense of the Christian people has always found expression in the veneration of relics.

Wearing of Medals

The religious sense of the Christian people has always found expression in the wearing of the medals.

Christian Funerals The ministry of the Church aims at expressing efficacious communion with the deceased, at the participation in that communion of the community gathered for the funeral and at the proclamation of eternal life to the community.

For the Christian, the day of death inaugurates at the end of his sacramental life, the fulfillment of his new birth begun at Baptism. All those liturgical activities, done at a funeral service, aim at praising God and asking His graces.

God also gives abundant blessings through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, we also make it a point to participate in these liturgical celebrations with faith and devotion.

95

Activity

1. Write three characteristics of Other Liturgical Celebrations.2. Name three of the Other Liturgical Celebrations.3. Write an article to the Wallpaper on “Other Liturgical

Celebrations that strengthen Christian Life.”

For LifeRevere the holy objects.