i

Grade 9

ENGLISH

Pupil's Book

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2017

Second Print - 2018

Third Print - 2019

Fourth Print - 2020

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0152-4

Published by : The Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by : State Printing Corporation, Panaluwa, Padukka.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha

Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

v

vi

Monitoring and Supervision - Mrs. W. M. Jayantha Wicramanayaka Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications Department

Direction - Mrs. W.A Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner (Development) Educational Publications Department

Co-ordination - Mr. Ranjith Iluppitiya Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

- Mrs. W. Indumini Darshika

Assistant Commissioner Educational Publications Department

Panel of Editors

1. Ms. Dilini Chamali Walisundara - Senior Lecturer Department of English University of Sri Jayawardenepura

2. Mrs. Bimba Maheshi Weerasuriya - Director of Education (English and Foreign Languages) Ministry of Education

3. Mr. W.M. Gamini Gunathilake - Senior Lecturer Wayamba National College of Education, Bingiriya 4. Mr. Ranjith Iluppitiya - Deputy Commissioner Educational Publications Department

vii

Panel of Writers

1. Mrs. R.W.P.L.K. Rambukwella - Teacher WP/Pili/ Moratumulla Lankasabha Vidyalaya Moratuwa 2. Ms. Esala Erangi Malawithanthri - Master Trainer Kalutara Zonal Education Office 3. Ms. H. M. Ganga Damayanthi Herath - Master Trainer Teacher Centre Nikaweratiya

4 . Mrs. H. A. Biyantha Kumari Wijepala - Teacher Gurukula College Kelaniya

5. Mr. Anura Dhammika Edirimanne - Teacher St. John’s College Nugegoda

Language Editing

Mr. R.M.D. Rohan - Lecturer Pasdunrata National College of Education Proof Reading

Mr. Jayalath Wickramasinghe - Teacher Eheliyagoda National College Illustration

Mr. A.W. Kithsiri Arambawatta - In - Service - Adviser KG/Dehi/Muhandiram Vidyalaya Deraniyagala Computer Designing & Formatting

Mrs. D.M. Jayani Nisansala Dissanayaka - Educational Publications Department

Cover Design

Mrs. D.M. Jayani Nisansala Dissanayaka - Educational Publications Department

viii

A Word to the Teacher.....

The Boards of Writers and Editors are honoured to be a part of this national endeavour to write and edit the Grade 09 English textbook and workbook for the students of this country. The textbook is designed to help the students to learn and use language in different situations locally and internationally. The book also contains additional information for the teachers in the form of competency levels and the corresponding activities with the hope of making the task of teaching easier. Furthermore, the book is designed to accommodate the different and varying proficiency levels of the students with the hope of addressing the needs of the larger student population of this country. In addition, the lessons are chronologically sequenced to avoid any confusion that may arise in the teaching process.

It is recommended that this book be used as a guide to the teachers and the students on the expected national standards, and teachers are encouraged to use supplementary material as much as possible in the classroom. We thank all those who worked with us and hope that we will be able to make a difference in the lives of our students who are keen and enthusiastic to learn English.

Board of Writers

Board of Editors

ix

CONTENTS

Unit Page

01 - EVERYBODY IS GOOD AT SOMETHING 01

02 - MAY I HELP YOU? 09

03 - MEETING 19

04 - EXTINCT FRIENDS 29

05 - A SECOND CHANCE CALLED TOMORROW 44

06 - ART 60

07 - WHERE WE ARE.... 72

08 - SUCCESS THROUGH CREATIVITY 84

09 - THE GREATEST WEALTH 91

10 - BE HAPPY, BE BRIGHT, BE YOU! 107

xi

Competency Levels to Be Covered in Grade Nine (For more details, please read the syllabus and the Teacher Instruction Manual)

1. Identifies the sounds of English language1.1 - Pronounces English words properly1.2 - Reads aloud different types of texts accurately and meaningfully1.3 - Pronounces English words and phrases properly

2. Uses mechanics of writing with understanding

2.6 - Uses commas with understanding

3. Engages in active listening and responds appropriately3.3 - Listens to a simple text for specific information 3.4 - Listens and transfers information to other forms3.5 - Identifies different information patterns and uses of word stress

4. Building up vocabulary using words appropriately and accurately to convey

precise meaning4.3 - Finds synonyms and antonyms for given words4.4 - Uses affixes to change the word class and the meaning of words4.5 - Forms the plurals of nouns4.7 - Uses nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs appropriately 4.8 - Uses collective nouns and compound nouns properly

5. Extracts necessary information from various types of texts5.1 - Uses visual clues to derive the meaning of texts5.2 - Extracts specific information from various types of simple texts5.3 - Transfers information into other forms5.4 - Reads and responds to simple poems5.5 - Reads and responds to simple folk tales5.6 - Extracts the general ideas of a text5.7 - Infers ellipted information5.8 - Infers implied information5.9 - Recognizes the organization of a text

6. Uses English grammar for the purpose of accurate and effective communication 6.1 - Construct simple sentences6.2 - Uses pronouns appropriately 6.6 - Uses adjectives properly6.7 - Uses prepositions appropriately 6.8 - Uses conjunctions appropriately 6.9 - Uses adverbs appropriately 6.10 - Uses the conditional clauses appropriately 6.11 - Uses reported speech accurately

xii

7. Uses English creatively and innovatively in written communication

7.1 - Writes descriptions of people, animals, places and things7.2 - Describes pictures

7.3 - Writes for personal purposes7.4 - Writes instructions 7.5 - Writes simple compositions on different types of texts7.6 - Writes poems and stories7.7 - Writes for official purposes

8. Communicates clearly, fluently and concisely

8.3 – Describes people, animals and objects using simple sentence patterns8.4 – Speaks on familiar topics8.8 – Describes the position of things accurately8.9 – Describes pictures8.11 – Describes past events and actions properly8.12 – Uses question words to get information8.13 – Uses language in a variety of contexts8.14 – Describes future events8.15 – Engages in telephone conversations

No. of Competency LevelsCompetency

1.1, 1.2, 1.31

2.62

3.3, 3.4, 3.53

4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.84

5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.95

6.1, 6.2, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10,6.11 6

7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7 7

8.3, 8.4, 8.8, 8.9, 8.11, 8.12, 8.13, 8.14, 8.158

The Book at a Glance

UnitCompetency LevelLesson/Activity

1Everybody

is Good at Something

1.1, 1.2Activity 1

5.2Activity 2

4.8Activities 3, 4

5.2Activity 5

6.7Activity 6

7.1Activity 7

6.7, 8.9Activity 8

3.3Activity 9

xiii

2May I Help You!

1.2, 2.6, 8.13Activity 1

5.2Activities 2, 3

1.2, 2.6Activity 4

8.13Activity 5

3.3Activity 6

5.2Activity 7

2.6Activity 8

1.2, 2.6 Activity 9

5.2 Activity 10

6.8Activity 11

1.2, 7.2, 8.8, 8.9 Activity 12

7.2Activity 13

3Meeting

1.1, 1.2, 5.2, 5.3Activities 1, 2

7.2, 8.9Activity 3

3.4, 3.5Activity 4

5.7Activity 5

1.2, 5.2, 5.3Activity 6

6.6Activity 7

8.4Activity 8

5.9Activity 9

4.5Activity 10

7.1Activity 11

5.6Activity 12

4Extinct Friends

1.1, 1.2Activity 1

4.7Activity 2

8.11Activity 3

7.6Activity 4

7.4Activity 5

5.1Activity 6

5.2, 5.3, 7.1Activity 7

8.3Activity 8

6.9Activities 9, 10

7.3, 7.7Activity 11

5.4, 5.6, 5.8Activities 12, 13

xiv

5A Second Chance Called

'Tomorrow'

1.2Activity 1

5.2Activity 2

8.14Activity 3

1.3, 5.2Activity 4

5.2Activity 5

4.3Activities 6, 7

8.12Activity 8

8.11Activity 9

7.3Activity 10

5.6, 5.9Activity 11

6.1Activity 12

5.2, 8.8, 7.2Activity 13

7.7Activity 14

3.4Activity 15

1.2Activity 16

6Art

1.1, 1.2, 3.5, 5.2, 5.3Activity 1

1.3Activity 2

4.7, 5.2Activity 3

8.14Activity 4

6.1Activity 5

1.1, 1.2Activity 6

5.2Activity 7

5.2, 5.3Activity 8

5.4Activity 9

7Where We

Are...

8.13Activity 1

4.7Activity 2

8.4, 8.8, 8.13Activity 3

4.3Activity 4

3.3, 3.4Activity 5

6.1Activity 6

6.1Activity 7

6.9Activity 8

8.11, 7.3Activity 9

5.4Activity 10

5.4, 5.6Activity 11

5.1

7.1, 7.2

5.2

5.2, 5.3

xv

8Success Through Creativity

1.2, 6.2Activity 1

5.2Activity 2

6.2Activities 3, 4

5.2Activity 5

3.3Activity 6

8.12Activity 7

7.4Activity 8

9The Greatest

Wealth

1.2, 5.5, 5.7Activity 1

5.7Activity 2

8.15Activity 3

6.10Activities 4, 5, 6

6.10Activity 7

5.3, 4.3Activity 8

7.4, 5.3 Activity 9

4.4Activities 10, 11, 12

3.3Activity 13

8.9Activity 14

7.5Activity 15

10Be Happy, Be Bright, Be You!

1.2Activity 1

5.2Activity 2

6.11Activity 3

3.4Activity 4

5.2, 5.8Activity 5

5.2Activity 6

4.7Activity 7

5.2, 5.8Activity 8

5.6Activity 9

1.3Activities 10, 11

5.2Activity 12

7.7Activity 13

7.1Activity 14

5.4, 5.6Activity 15

1.3, 5.4Activity 16

8.8, 8.12Activity 17

xvi

Dear Student,

Please do not write anything in this book. Use your exercise book to do the activities that appear here.

1

Activity 1 Act out

Malith and Pubudu are talking about a TV programme.

Malith : Hello Pubudu, did you watch the finals of “Children Can

Sing” on TV yesterday?

Pubudu : Yes, I did. You know, all my family are music lovers. So,

we watched it all together.

Malith: There was quite a large audience at the show, wasn’t

there?

Pubudu: Yes, the hall was full. And what about the boy who came

first? He had a great voice.

1Everybody is Good at Something

2

Malith: He sure did. The audience were already clapping their

hands when his name was announced.

Pubudu: Yes, they must have guessed all along that he was going

to be the winner.

Malith: What about the orchestra? It was quite big. There were

nearly thirty members in it.

Pubudu: Yes, the orchestra were all talented. They did a wonderful

job.

Malith: Yes, you took the words right out of my mouth!

Activity 2 Reading

Answer the following questions.1. What is the TV programme mentioned in the dialogue?2. Did Pubudu watch it alone?3. Who had a great voice?4. How many members did the orchestra consist of?5. ‘You took the words right out of my mouth.’ What does this mean? a) I didn’t understand what you said. b) I was going to say the same thing. c) I don’t agree with you.

5. Find words in the conversation which mean much the same as the

following. i.) said officially or in public:ii.) almost:iii) a group of listeners or spectators:

3

Learning point

Collective Nouns

When we use a collective noun, we can use either a singular or a plural verb. The choice depends on whether we see the group as a whole or as a number of individual members.

We use a singular verb if the group acts as a single unit, and a plural verb when the members of the group act as a number of individuals.

e.g. :- 1) There was quite a large audience. (The audience seen as a unit) 2) The audience were already clapping their hands. (The audience seen as a group of people acting individually)

Here is a list of common collective nouns.

army committtee orchestraaudience crew publicboard family staffband jury team

Activity 3 Vocabulary

Fill in the blanks with the words given in the box.

crew, team, there, has, are

1) A cricket ............................ consists of eleven players.2) The medical team ........................ discussing how they can tackle the

dengue problem.3) ............................was a TV crew at the ceremony.4) The ship’s ............................were all saved by the Navy.5) The band ............................ only one guitarist.

4

Activity 4 Vocabulary

Fill in the blanks with the correct verb.1) Their family ................................ (is/are) smaller than ours.2) The crowd ................................ (was/were) cheering at the top of

their voices.3) There................................ (is/are) a small crowd outside the gate.4) All her family..............................(is/are) vegetarians.5) The cricket team.............................. (has/have) just finished their

warm-up exercises.

Activity 5 Reading

Read the text and answer the questions.

Abilities and Talents Different people have different abilities and talents. For example, among us there are people who are artistically inclined. They may have a host of talents such as music, dancing or painting - to name but a few. Then there are those who have a natural ability for technical activities such as working with electronic gadgets.

Many of us are usually fortunate enough to find out early in life what we are really good at and make a success of it. However, as implied by the popular saying, ‘You do not know what you can do till you try,’ some people fail to discover their true potential. A child, for example, may just sit somewhere with a box of crayons beside him, but he will never be able to find out if he has the makings of an artist until he starts working with crayons.

5

What really lies beneath someone’s success in any field is dedication and hard work. James Watt or the Wright brothers, for example, did not make their inventions overnight. They were driven by true interest in what they were trying to achieve. So, we should all aim at deriving the maximum benefit and satisfaction from our abilities and talents.

1) Name two things that artistically - inclined people are good at.2) What is the popular saying quoted in the passage?3) Who are the inventors mentioned?4) What helped them to be successful in their work?5) Find words from the text which mean much the same as the

following: i) by the side of: ii) find for the first time: iii) lucky: iv) highest:

Learning point

Prepositions

Prepositions link words. They are used before nouns, pronouns and the - ing form of verbs to show place, position, time, direction, purpose, etc.

e.g. :- 1) Fish live in water. (noun)

2) My best friend is Suresh. I often borrow story books

from him. (pronoun) 3) My brother is good at solving crossword puzzles. (-ing form of verb)

6

Activity 6 Grammar

Study the prepositions highlighted in the text ‘Abilities and Talents’.

among, for, of, beside, beneath, from

Now complete the following sentences, using the above prepositions.

1) The little girl was sitting ___________________her mother.2) Some ______________the mangoes in the bag aren’t ripe enough.3) I received this picture postcard ______________my uncle in Canada.4) Most children have a liking _______________chocolate.5) The river flows very fast ______________ the bridge.6) The cottage is hidden _________________the trees.

Activity 7 Writing

Supun, a grade nine student, wants to write a paragraph about his best friend for the class wall newspaper. Imagine you are Supun and write the paragraph using the following details.

Name - Ranuka

- good at English- reads a lot- fond of learning new words- loves solving crossword puzzles- writes stories and simple poems in English- can sing English songs- president of the Junior English Literary Association- helps me with my English- always encourages me to speak in English

You may start like this.My best friend Ranuka is ..............................

7

Activity 8 Speaking

Describe what you see in the picture.

Use the words given in the box when describing the picture.

in beside balloonson among stagebeneath drummer guitarist keyboardist

You may begin like this:This is a scene from a school concert......

8

Activity 9 Listening

Listen to the announcement and choose the correct answer.

1) The event mentioned is a ... a) debate b) talent show c) prize giving

2) It was held at a ... a) theatre b) town hall c) school

3) The third place in the singing competition was won by ... a) Malith Weerakoon b) Sujan Kuruppu c) Kevin Cabral

4) Tharusha Padmindu did a mime of a... a) tightrope walker b) motorcyclist c) traffic policeman

9

Activity 1 - Act out

Yohan and Meena are at the supermarket with their mother.

Mother : We need a kilo of beans, 500 grams of pumpkin and a bundle of spinach.Meena : I’ll get them. They are in the produce section.

2May I Help You?

10

Mother : Thanks, Meena. Yohan, could you get a packet of flour and half a dozen eggs?Yohan : Sure. Anything else?Mother : Yes, a carton of fresh milk. Oh, and while you’re there, get a tub of yoghurt too.Yohan : Okay. I also need a box of coloured pencils.Meena : Mother, those mangoes look fresh, yummy and juicy. Can we buy some?Mother : Alright, but only two, please.Yohan : Mother, I couldn’t find the pencils.Mother : (to the shop assistant) Excuse me, where can I find a box of coloured pencils?Shop assistant : They’re in the stationery section, next to the

cosmetics section.Mother : Thanks. We need vegetable oil also.Shop assistant : Sorry, it’s out of stock. We have coconut oil. It’s in aisle 2.Mother : Thank you. Well, that’s all. Let’s go to the checkout counter. Cashier : Good afternoon, madam! How would you like to pay?Mother : In cash.Cashier : That’ll be 890 rupees.Mother : Here you are.Cashier : Thank you. Have a lovely day!Mother : Thanks. You too.

11

Activity 2 Reading

Read the conversation and write down the items Yohan and his family bought at the supermarket.

e. g. :- 1kg beans

Activity 3 Reading

Where can you find these items in a supermarket? Match the two columns.

milk

chilli powder

fruit and vegetables

wholegrain bread

soap, detergent

exercise books

chocolates

confectionery

produce

dairy products

condiments

household items

stationery

bakery

Activity 4

Read these sentences aloud, pausing at the commas.

• We need a kilo of beans, 500 grams of pumpkin and a bundle of spinach.• Yohan, could you get a packet of flour?• Mother, I couldn’t find the pencils.• They’re in the stationery section, next to the cosmetics section.• Sorry, it’s out of stock.

12

Activity 5 Groupwork – Speaking and Writing

Imagine you are going to the grocery with your father. Your mother has given you the grocery list. Prepare the dialogue between your father and the shopkeeper and act it out to the class. Display your dialogues in the classroom.

You may use the grocery list and language expressions given below.

2 coconuts

1 tube of toothpaste

2 kilos of brown rice

1 bar of Superwhite soap

1 kilo of sugar

5 candles

I need ……., please.

How much is ……?

Sorry, we don’t sell ….

Have you got …?

Here’s your change …

Which brand do you need?

Activity 6 Listening

You will hear a conversation between a bank clerk and a customer. Listen to it and circle the correct answer in the table given in activity 2 of the workbook unit 2.

Activity 7 Reading

Ram’s grandmother Mrs. Rani Fernando wants to deposit 10,000 rupees in her bank account. Therefore, Ram has accompanied his grandmother to the bank. She cannot fill in the slip on her own as she has forgotten her spectacles. Imagine you are Ram and help your grandmother to fill in the cash deposit slip.

Fill in the deposit slip given in activity 3 of your workbook unit 2.

13

Learning point

Punctuation Marks - The comma

Commas are used:• to separate items in a list: a series of nounse.g. :- We have a cat, a dog and a parrot.  a series of verbse.g. :- The boy ran, stumbled and fell down. a series of adjectivese.g. :- My mother is beautiful, kind and intelligent.

• to enclose detailsSri Lanka, one of the most beautiful countries in the world, is my motherland.Suresh, who is an avid reader, buys at least two new books a month.

• after interjections – well, yes, hello, heye.g. :- Hello, how are you? Yes, I do./No, I don’t.

• before tag questionse.g. :- You’re coming, aren’t you?

• after a dependent clausee.g. :- When I go to Kandy, I always visit my aunt.When the dependent clause follows the independent clause, the comma is not used.e.g. :- I always visit my aunt when I go to Kandy.

• between two independent clauses (sentences) that are joined with a coordinating conjunction – and, but, or, so, for, nor, yete.g. :- It was a rainy day, yet I went to school.

14

Activity 8 Punctuation

Rewrite the sentences inserting commas where necessary.

1. I painted my room blue pink and white.

2. Mr. Perera my next-door neighbour is a nice gentleman.

3. We are having rice dhal curry fried brinjal and a salad for lunch.

4. If you work hard you will get good results.

5. “He is your little brother isn’t he?”

6. A: Have you read Madol Doowa the famous children’s novel?

B: Yes I have.

Activity 9 Punctuation

Rewrite the paragraph, adding commas where necessary. Then read the paragraph aloud.

Last Sunday I went to the fair with my aunt. The place was crowded with men women and children. The fair was filled with all kinds of things. There were fruit vegetables pots clothes toys and many other items. Everybody was either buying or selling something. My aunt bought some rice vegetables and fruit while I bought a toy car a blue pencil box and some candyfloss. While I was there I also met Harin my best friend from primary school.

Activity 10 Reading

Read the text and answer the questions.

Goods and Services

Every living being has needs and wants. Neither humans nor animals can live without having their needs fulfilled. We need food to eat, a place to live in and clothes to wear. We also need doctors when we are sick, teachers to provide us with education and bankers

15

to help us in financial matters. Because the needs and wants are important, every society has ways to get them fulfilled. In economics, some of our needs and wants fall into two categories. They are goods and services.

Goods are objects or things we can use or consume. Food, clothes, furniture, books, computers and everything else we use are goods. They are either made or grown. It is the duty of the manufacturers to produce goods to match the needs of people. These goods are sold to consumers and a profit is earned by the traders.

Services are actions. A service is work that someone provides for someone else. Fields like education, transportation, health and postal services come under this category. Some services are given free while some have to be paid for.

Sri Lanka, which is a developing country, provides free education and medical facilities to all its citizens. Such facilities are not available free of charge even in some first world countries.

1. a) What are some of the needs mentioned in the text?

b) What are goods?c) What are services?d) Name two services provided free of charge in Sri Lanka.

2. Match the words with the correct meanings.

a. consume i. make or manufactureb. produce ii. gainc. profit iii. eat, drink or use up

16

Learning point

Conjunctions

either….. or / neither …nor

either..or is used:

• to talk about a choice between two possibilities

e. g. :- You can either walk or take the bus.

Goods are either made or grown.

Either you or Ganesh has to bring the register of attendance. (singular)Either my father or my uncles organize our annual family trip. (plural)

Neither… nor is used

• to join two negative ideas

e.g. :- Neither Ravi nor Abdul plays football.

Raj was sick last week . He neither came to school nor joined us on the trip.Neither my sister nor my brothers know how to swim. (plural)Neither Romani nor her parents eat meat. (plural)Neither the students nor the teacher has to come tomorrow. (singular)

Activity 11 Grammar

Complete the sentences with either ..or/ neither .. nor.• .........my mother …… . my sister will prepare the lunch. One of them

has to go to the bank.• ……… Rashi ……… Ameen knows how to play chess. You’ll have to

teach them.• We can have classes ………….. in the morning ………. in the afternoon.

Which is easier for you?• Mr. Jinadasa drinks …………… tea ………… coffee. He prefers water.

17

• A: What are you doing this evening?

B: I haven’t decided yet. I will …………. read a novel ………. watch a

film.

Activity 12 Reading and Speaking

Step ILook at the picture of the railway station and read the given description

aloud.

This is a picture of a railway station. The time is a quarter to one in the afternoon. There are many commuters on the platform. A train has just pulled into the station. People are standing in line to board the train. However, the platform on the other side does not look crowded. There are only a few people there. A family is sitting on a bench. A woman is putting a piece of paper into the litter bin. Some people are coming down the stairs while a few are standing on the platform.

18

Speaking

Step II

Describe the picture of the post office given below using the following words.

letterspost parcelsmoney orders

mailbox

registered post

stampsparcel counter

Activity 13 Writing

Write a short description about the post office in the picture.

19

Activity 1 - Act out

The Prefects’ Guilds of Gajaba M.V. and Kanaganayagam M.V. have jointly organized “The International Conference for Student Leaders” for the first time in Sri Lanka. Student leaders from 10 different countries are invited to this conference. Different grades have been assigned different responsibilities. The grade 9 pupils have been given the responsibility of welcoming and ushering the guests. A group of friends from the two schools meet to discuss what they have to do.

Madhavi: Hi! I hope I’m on time.Pavith: Yes, you are. Now that all are here, shall we start?Nipuna: Well, have you thought of how we should welcome our guests?Pavith: Sounds like you’ve got a plan up your sleeve.Nipuna: Actually, I have.Ajayan: That’s great! Ashani: So, tell us about it, Nipuna.

Nipuna: Alright. The most common form of welcoming guests at international conferences is shaking hands, but each culture has its own form of greeting guests. Ajayan: Is that so? Are you sure?Nipuna: Wait till I finish. We all need to be mindful about how we greet people.

3Meeting

20

Pavith: Ah, why is that?Nipuna: Well, for example, in some cultures women do not shake hands with men. Madhavi: Mmm…. that’s true. Are there any countries that greet their guests like we do?Ashani: Yes, there are many, like India and Nepal. Nipuna: They say ‘Namaste’ while we say ‘Ayubowan’ and ‘Wannakum’ and we all use the same gesture. Ashani: Yes.

Ajayan: You know, even in Thailand, they use the same gesture.

Pavith: And the Japanese, they bow like this. (bows and shows)Madhavi: OK, now that we have some information, what do we do next? Ashani: Why don’t we go to the computer lab to find some more information?

Activity 2 Reading

Read the conversation and do the following activities.

A) State if the following statements are “True” or “False”.

1. The conversation is about a national conference.2. This event is for student leaders.3. Pupils representing different countries will attend the programme.4. The event is organized for the first time.5. The friends are talking only about how they greet in India.

B) Answer the following questions.

1. Who are the organizers of the event ?2. What is the responsibility given to the grade 9 pupils?

21

3. What are the countries mentioned in the conversation?

C) Find information about some other countries and complete the

table given below.

Name of the CountryHow they greet

Activity 3 Speaking / Writing

Look at the pictures given below. Work in pairs and write the greeting shown by each picture.

12

34

22

Activity 4 Listening

Listen to the dialogue between Ajayan and Nipuna and do the workbook activity 3 in unit 3.

Learning point

Read the following utterances taken from the conversation.

Madhavi: Hi! I hope I’m on time.Pavith: Yes, you are.

Here the words in bold type mean, “You are on time.’’

Now read the following.

Pavith: Sounds like you’ve got a plan up your sleeve.Nipuna: Actually, I have.

Here “I have”means “I have got a plan.”

Activity 5 Reading

Read the following dialogues. Write what is meant by the words in bold.

1) Deshan : You seem to be happy. Chamod : Yes, I am.

2) Adhil : I like to play football. Rikaz : So do I.

3) Arjun : He is tired. Isuru : Yes, he is. He has been practising all day.

4) Kavindi : I think she answered all the questions. Ashani : She did.

5) Chalindu : Hope we have enough water for the trip. Navindu : Yes, we do.

23

Activity 6 Reading

Given below is an article read by Nisala, who is a prefect. He read the article to get an idea about the utensils the delegates would use when eating. Read it aloud and answer the questions.

The tools used for eating food vary around the world. They include spoons, chopsticks, forks, etc. These utensils mostly depend on the kind of food people eat. Spoons, forks and knives are commonly found in western countries such as England, Germany and France.

However, they vary in shape and size depending on the purpose. For example, table fork, fruit fork and dessert fork vary in size.

Chopsticks have been used in East Asia for many years. They are used in countries such as China, Japan and Korea. However, it is said that the Chinese were the first to use them.

Apart from that, people in some countries use fingers to eat. For instance, in Sri Lanka people use fingers to mix the curries with their rice. In Ethiopia people use their right hand to eat food. Their staple food is ‘injera’, a pancake-like flat bread which is usually served on a large

flat plate. This is topped with all types of curries. They use pieces of ‘injera’ to scoop the curries. Similarly, Indians too have the habit of scooping the vegetables and other curries with ‘naan’ or ‘chapathi’. Many people in Mexico too use ‘tortillas’ to scoop rice, beans and

other food. However, at present people all over the world, across different cultures use forks, knives and spoons even to eat their own local dishes.

24

1) State whether the following are ‘True’ or ‘False’.

a) People around the world use different utensils for eating.b) Most western countries only use spoons for eating.c) Most people in East Asian countries use chopsticks when

eating.d) ‘Injera’ is the staple food in Mexico.

2) Complete the following table.

Country/CountriesUtensil(s) used for eating

3) Write what is meant by the following words/phrases highlighted

in the text.

a) themb) this

4) Suggest a suitable title for this text.

Activity 7 Grammar

a) Find all the adjectives given in activity 6. b) Write sentences using the adjectives you have found.

25

Activity 8 Groupwork

Imagine that you are asked to deliver a speech on healthy food at the school assembly. Write down the points for the speech and then de-liver the speech to the class.

Activity 9 Reading

Madhavi and Ashani were interested in different types of food. They found the recipe for preparing ‘uppumavu’. The following are the ingredients of the recipe.

Ingredients: ½ cup of semolina 1tbsp (table spoon) of oil/ghee¼ to ½ tsp (tea spoon) of cumin (optional, adds aroma)¼ to ½ tsp of mustard1 tsp of chickpeas (optional, adds aroma)6 – 8 cashews halved and cleaned1 sprig of curry leavesA handful of sliced onions 1 hot green chilli, slit½ tsp of ginger very finely chopped (optional)A pinch of asafetida1 ½ cups of water

The recipe given below is not in order. Reorder the recipe.

1. Cover the semolina mixed with all at a low flame until the water

evaporates (1 - 2 minutes).

2. First, roast semolina on a low to medium heat until crunchy.

3. Pour water and salt as needed to the pan with all fried ingredients.

26

4. While the roasted semolina cools, add oil to a pan.

5. Then transfer roasted semolina into a bowl and let it cool.

6. Next add onions, ginger, curry leaves and green chilli to the pan

with fried chickpeas, cumin, etc. and saute for two minutes. Then add asafetida.

7. Take the pan with uppumavu off the fire and allow it to rest for 5

minutes.

8. Wait till the water boils and then add semolina while mixing all

together. Do not allow any lumps to remain.

9. When the oil is heated enough, add chickpeas, cumin, mustard

and cashews, and fry them until they turn into golden colour.

10. Finally, the hot tasty uppumavu is ready to serve.

11. Once the water is evaporated, open the lid and mix them again.

(Adapted from http://indianhealthyrecipes.com/upma-recipe-how-to-make-upma/)

Learning point

Read the following ingredients taken from the recipe.

½ cup of semolina (half a cup of semolina)

1 ½ cups of water

Water and semolina are uncountable nouns. Note how the plural

is formed.

Also note the following.

One bag of rice.

Three bags of rice , three pieces of furniture

27

Activity 10 Vocabulary

A) Fill in the blanks using the suitable form of the nouns given in

brackets.

1. My mother drinks two big ………………… of water every morning.

(glass)

2. Mr. Kumar was carrying a …………………… of rice. (bag)

3. I took three …………….. of mineral water for our trip. (bottle)

4. Chamod gave three ………….. of rice to three poor men. (packet)

5. Ashani, Kavindi and Manuthi gathered four ……………………. of

flowers. (basket)

B) Now do workbook activity 6.

Activity 11 Writing

On the final day of “The International Conference for Student Leaders” all were dressed in their national costume. Describe what Nipuna, Madhavi, Ajayan and other friends would have worn. You may use the following phrases.

sarong, sari, long-sleeved shirt (with/without collars) up to

the knee, white sarong, osari, verti, angavastram (a flat and

narrow folded shawl wound round the waist with the ends

brought up over the shoulders crossways), cap, garland of

flowers, fardha, scarf, full suit, frock, shawl

You may begin like this: The pupils representing Sri Lanka were dressed in different attire depending on the community they represent……

28

Activity 12 Reading

Read the following poem and list out the qualities a leader should have.

I am a LEADER

I am great and bold

never quitting

I have the heart of gold

I lead by example

I show what to do

I empower people to be a TEAM

and make them realize

to follow their dream.

Clifford Villaflores

(www.rapportleadership.com)

29

Activity 1 Act out

Nethula’s Tour to the Ice Age.

2. Hello! I’m from the Ice Age. Wouldn’t you like

to go on a ride

with me?

1. I can’t

believe my eyes! A mammoth1!

4. No, we are

in theIce Age.

5. Oh! Are

there any dinosaurs2?

3. It’s freezing! Where are we?

Are we in the

Arctic?

4Extinct Friends

30

6. Sorry, they’re extinct.

But I’ll show you something

else. Look at

that!

7. What a huge skeleton! Is it a

dinosaur’s?

8. Yes.

10. Amazing! At school, we were taught how they

became extinct.

9. Let’s go this way. You can also

see a fossilized

footprint of a

dinosaur.

31

11.Grrrrr!

12. What’s

that ferocious

growl I

hear?

13. Be careful! It’s a carnivore3.

15. Wake

up, son!

14. Oh! A sabre-toothed4 tiger! Help! Help!

Pronunciation 1. /ˈmæməθ/

2. /ˈdaɪnəsɔː(r)/ 3. /ˈkɑːnɪvɔː(r)/4. /ˈseibətu:θt/

32

Answer the following questions.1. Where did the mammoth come from?2. Did Nethula agree to go on a ride with the mammoth?3. Name two special things the boy saw on his ride.4. What was the carnivorous animal in the cave?5. Did Nethula really experience this incident?

Activity 2 Vocabulary

Refer to a dictionary and find the word class ( noun, adjective, etc.) and the meaning of the following words in the given context. 1. skeleton2. extinct3. fossilized4. ferocious5. carnivore

Activity 3 Speaking

Imagine that you are Nethula and relate your dream to the class. You may start as follows. Last night I had an insteresting dream. I was walking in my garden. Suddenly, a mammoth appeared and ... Activity 4 Writing

Write the story ‘Nethula’s Tour to the Ice Age’ in your own words. You may use the words and phrases given below.

33

One fine day

Then Suddenly

Finally

aanthe

appeared

invitedwas (surprised/

glad/ afraid)

joined

sawshowed

heardshoutedwas walking

mammoth

it

Igrandmother

meskeletonfootprint

growlsabre-toothed tiger

You may start the story as follows.

One fine day, Nethula was walking in his garden. Suddenly a mammoth ...

Activity 5 Reading

Read the following instructions. Note how they are formed.

Instructions: Wash your hands before your meals. Don’t litter the school premises.

A. Categorise the instructions given below.

Safety at homeSafety on roadSafety at play

34

1. Don’t drive/ ride fast.2. Keep all medicines out of the reach of children.3. Don’t throw the javelin until the field is made ready for it.4. Always do warm - up and warm - down exercises before and after the sports activities.5. Cross the road only at the pedestrian crossing.6. Don’t put boiling water into glass or plastic bottles.7. Don’t block the entrance when parking your vehicle.8. Wear safety gear and suitable clothing when playing a sport. 9. Handle sharp tools/ instruments carefully. 10. Walk on the right side of the road.11. Wear slippers when handling electric items.12. Don’t participate in sports activities if you are not feeling well.13. Always wear a helmet when riding a bike. 14. Don’t use mobile phones when walking on the road or driving.15. Don’t get into the swimming pool until your coach tells you to do

so.

B. Add two more such instructions to each group.

C. Prepare a poster instructing the public on one of the topics given

in activity A.

Activity 6 Vocabulary

Match the words/ phrases with the pictures. You may refer to a dictionary.

35

dinosaurmammalsclaws

caveinvertebrate

jawcanine toothfossil

skeletonvalley

a

b

c

d

e

f

g

h

i

j

36

Activity 7 Reading

The following is a documentary telecast in one of the children’s television programmes. Read it and answer the questions.

Dinosaurs are a popular topic when we discuss the prehistoric era. Today, let’s unearth more mysteries of this lesser known era.

Have you heard of any prehistoric mammals? If not, you would surely love to see Megatherium1, an elephant-sized ground sloth. Look at this life-size replica of the megatherium which greets visitors at the Sloth Sanctuary in Costa Rica. Imagine that an elephant-sized hairy animal with giant claws ambling through the landscape, looking for trees it could sit in front of and slowly chew the leaves.

This extinct herbivore stood seven metres tall and weighed seven tons. There are many views in the scientific world about the disappearance of this creature. One of them is that they dissappeared as a result of fast changes in the climate. Another is that these sloths had been hunted to extinction by the carnivores.

Now let’s look at an extinct carnivorous sea creature. Ammonites2 were a group of shelled sea creatures that mysteriously disappeared at the same time as the dinosaurs. Ammonites were invertebrates: creatures without a backbone. Instead, they had a very supportive shell. Ammonites grew as big as one metre in diameter. They probably lived in warm, shallow, tropical areas of the ocean. Their diet consisted of small fish. Ammonites were popular on the menus of larger carnivorous marine creatures, but they would either have had to pull them out from the shell, or have had jaws powerful enough to crush them.

37

Do you know that Sri Lanka is one of the best sources of prehistoric studies in South Asia? Over 180 prehistoric sites have been found in Sri Lanka including undisturbed human habitats. The caves called Batadomba Lena3 a site near Kuruvita, in Ratnapura, Belilena in Kitulgala, Pahiyangala in Bulathsinhala and Aligala, a site near Sigiriya provide such evidence. The excavations are still going on with the involvement of many archaeologists.

Now we have come to the end of today’s segment. Hope you would read more on the prehistoric era.

1. /megəθerɪum/2. / ˈæmənaɪt/ 3. / lenǝ/ (lenə in Sinhala means cave in English, /kʊhаɪ in Tamil)

1. Write True (T) or False (F).

I) Dinosaurs were the only creatures that lived in the prehistoric era.II) There is a sloth sanctuary in Costa Rica.III) Ammonites had a supportive backbone.IV) Ammonites were carnivores. 2. Fill in the following grid.

MegatheriumAmmonitesDiet type ( e.g. :- Omnivore)DietHabitat ( e.g. :- Land)SizePhysical featuresThreat/s to their lives

3. Match the words with their meaning.

I) replica - walking in a slow relaxed wayII) ambling - connected with the time in history before information was written downIII) invertebrates - an exact copy of somethingIV) prehistoric - animals with no backbone

38

4. What does the following extract mean? “Ammonites were popular on the menus of larger carnivorous marine creatures”

5. Do you know that a group of scientists are trying to bring the

wooly mammoth back to life? Use the following key phrases and write a short description of the wooly mammoth. You may begin as follows. The wooly mammoth lived during the prehistoric era...

 Scientific name - Mammuthus

primigenius Extinct relative of today’s

elephant Diet type - Herbivore Physical features - smaller

ears than those of elephants, long tusks about 5 metres, hairy  Habitat - grasslands

Activity 8 Speaking

Speak about the following extinct creature. * Tyrannosaurus Rex

 one of the largest meat-eating dinosaurs  laid eggs  physical features length - about 12 metres height - about 5 metres about 1metre long jaw long powerful tail strong thighs two-fingered short forearms habitat - forested river valleys in North America extinction - 65 million years ago

Source- National Geographic

helped to move quickly

39

Learning point

The bold type words in the documentary given above are adverbs which have been used to describe the verbs. Adverbs are also used to add more information to an adjective and another adverb.e.g. :- - The dinosaurs could run fast. (verb)- The Mariana Trench is incredibly deep. (adjective) - They learnt the new language amazingly well. (adverb)

Activity 9 Grammar

Fill in the blanks using the most suitable adverb.

ravenously historically

veryswiftly

extremely

1. The extreme weather had affected the animals ..................... badly.

2. Cheetah can run ...............................

3. The Tyrannosaurus Rex is an ............................. dangerous animal.

4. Cave paintings reveal .................................... important facts.

5. Hyenas ate the carcass ..............................

40

Activity 10 Grammar

Read the list of adverbs given below which are commonly used to express the speaker’s/ writer’s attitude.

luckily fortunately honestlyunfortunately surprisingly miraculouslysadly unexpectedly mysteriously

Construct sentences using the adverbs given above. You may follow the example given below.

e.g. :- 1) A : Unfortunately, the dinosaurs were extinct. I wish I had one as my pet. B : Luckily, they are extinct now or you would be their dessert.

2) A : Some animals, miraculously, survived even in the Ice Age. B : Surprisingly, some plants too could survive.

Activity 11 Writing

Read the following notice and the note.

NOTICE

A documentary on ‘The Life in the Stone Age’ will be screened on Friday 20th February from 2.30 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. at the auditorium of Nilmalvila M.V. Reserve your seat

before 10th February through your class teacher.

01.02.2018 English Club Isipathana M.V.

41

08.02.2018Sherin,

There’s a documentary on ‘The Life in the Stone Age’ at

Nilmalvila M.V. auditorium on 20th February. Would you like to see it? Our teacher wants to reserve the seats. Write to me immediately. Sharadha

A. Imagine you are Sherin and write a reply to Sharadha.

B. Imagine that grade 9 pupils of your school have organized an

exhibition : Evolution of Man. Write a notice informing all the pupils, teachers and parents about the exhibition. Mention the date, venue and the importance of the exhibition.

C. Write a note to your cousin inviting him/her to the exhibition.

42

Activity 12 Read and enjoy

DINOTHESAURUS

The dinosaursfirst lived outdoorsduring the time Triassic.While most died out,some came aboutlater in the Jurassic.Then they evolved,as Earth revolved,in times known as Cretaceous.But now indoorsgreat dinosaursfill museum halls, spacious.

BaryonyxBARE-ee-ON-icks(heavy claw)he had a huge and heavy clawand crocodile-like skull.A lashing, slashing dino-saw --a sharpie; never dull.His claws and jaws and

pointed teethwere fashioned to attack.If Bary you should ever meet--ask him to scratch your back.

by Douglas Florian

http://richiespicks.pbworks.com/Activity 13 Reading

Read the poem again and answer the questions given below.

1. What were the three time periods in which the dinosaurs lived?

2. Where are the dinosaurs at present?

3. Which of the following illustrations best fits the description of the

Baryonyx in the poem?

43

a

b

d

c

4. What does the poet ask you to do if you should ever meet a

Baryonyx?

5. List out the rhyming words found in the poem.

6. Follow the verse on Baryonyx and write a poem on your own on

any creature you like.

44

Activity 1 - Act out

It is the first day of the new school term. Some grade nine students of Kurulugama Maha Vidyalaya are talking about their vacation.

Chenitha : Good morning, friends! What are you talking about?

Mihimali : Good morning! We are talking about our vacation.

Chenitha : Oh, the vacation! It just came and went.

Mihimali : Hey! That’s true. Why do vacations end so fast?

5

A Second Chance Called ‘Tomorrow’

45

Farzana : Yes, it’s a pity, isn’t it? I had planned to do many things

during the vacation but couldn’t complete most of

them.

Raju : In my case, I managed to do many things. I planted

vegetables in our home garden. I watered them every

day. I finished all my homework and read three books.

I managed to visit the planetarium too.

Mihimali : That’s great. I tidied my room but couldn’t go

anywhere.

Chenitha : I wanted to study and prepare short notes but I simply

had no time.

Farzana : No time? Come on! There are twenty four hours in a

day!

Raju : Hmm…. that’s true. Maybe, that’s just an excuse. I

think we waste most of our time.

Chenitha : You have a point there. My term test marks were not

very good. I’ll start studying from tomorrow itself.

Farzana : Yes. Better late than never. Let’s have a plan and start

studying from tomorrow.

Mihimali : Have a plan and study? You’ve got to be kidding! I

planned many things but most of them were not

successful.

Raju : Remember the lesson in the grade 8 English textbook?

Plan the work, work the plan.

46

Farzana : Yes, that’s true. You have to not only plan the work

but also work the plan. And that’s what we are going

to do from tomorrow!

Activity 2 Reading

Read the conversation and answer the questions.

1. What are the students talking about?

2. Write two things Raju did during the vacation.

3. Who couldn’t go anywhere during the holidays?

4. What did Chenitha want to do during the vacation?

5. Why couldn’t he do what he had planned?

6. Who says the following?

a. “Why do vacations end so fast?”

b. “I simply had no time.”

c. “There are twenty four hours in a day!”

d. “Better late than never.”

Read the following sentences taken from the students’ conversation. Pay attention to the highlighted parts. They describe future events and actions.

I’ll start studying from tomorrow itself.

Let’s have a plan and start studying from tomorrow.

That’s what we are going to do from tomorrow.

.

47

Learning point - Talking about future events

You can use the following different structures to describe future events.

The children will go to the park at the weekend. (Simple future- simple prediction)

Chenitha will be studying for his exam the whole of next week.(Future continuous- An action in progress in the future)

The train leaves at 10’clock. (Simple present tense- Time-tabled events)

Look at the dark clouds. It is going to rain. (Be + going to + verb stem - Prediction based on present evidence)

They are moving into a new house next week. (Present continuous-Arrangements)

Activity 3 Speaking

List five things you have planned to do tomorrow. Describe them to your partner using suitable sentence patterns from those given above.

e. g. :- I will be visiting my grandparents tomorrow.

• Now, complete activity 1 in unit 5 of your workbook.

48

Activity 4 Reading

100 Metres

27

The playground was large. The sports teacher asked me to wait there and disappeared among the crowd.

I mustn’t go anywhere from here.

What a crowd of students! Boys in white shoes and white socks. How smart they look! They must be from the city. I’ve heard that the boys from the city are a bit arrogant.

“Mudalihamy, this is the under sixteen, hundred meters. Next will be the under thirteen event. You are taking part in that. Don’t look so scared. I’m sure you can win,” said the sports teacher while pinning number 27 on the front and the back of my vest. I wished the paper was big enough to cover the stain on the front of my vest. Will

49

the city boys see it and laugh at me?

“There, listen! Mudalihamy, your number is being called. Hurry up, my boy!”

How should I go to the starting point? Should I walk or should I run? Some of the boys are wearing shoes with spikes. Will they step on my feet? Will I be able to compete with them and win? One thing is certain. If I win, father, mother and everyone in my family will be happy.

“Come on Saroj!” “Come on Priyan!” “Come on Janak!”

Who will say, “Come on Mudalihamy!”? I remember my friends cheering me at the house meet. It gave me a lot of courage that day.

“Ready, steady, go!”

A boy wearing spikes is running fast just next to me. I must run faster than him. Will he step on my foot? Never mind. Let him. I will still run faster. Now it’s close to the end. I think I have won.

“Here is another result. Under thirteen, hundred meters, first place, Kalubandage Mudalihamy.”

I heard the loud speaker announcing my name. It was like a dream come true. Everyone was cheering. Everyone was clapping. I couldn’t hear what the loudspeaker announced because of the cheering. The boy who was wearing the spiked shoes was on my right. He had won the second place.

“Congratulations Mudalihamy! You were great!” he said, shaking my hand.

The boy who came in third also joined him. I think I was

50

mistaken earlier. After all, city boys are good.

“I knew you would win Mudalihamy. Good boy!” The sports teacher said as he gently stroked my head and tears of joy welled up in my eyes.

(Adapted and translated- “100 metres” Grade 7 Sinhala Textbook, EPD, 1985)

Activity 5 Reading

Read the extract from the story ‘100 metres’ and answer the ques-tions.

1. Who disappeared among the crowd?

2. What had Mudalihamy heard about the city boys?

3. What was Mudalihamy’s event?

4. Who pinned the numbers on Mudalihamy’s vest?

5. Why did Mudalihamy later think that the city boys were good?

Activity 6 Vocabulary

Find synonyms for the following words from the passage.

big - frightened -proud - mark -fastening - wrong -

Activity 7 Vocabulary

Find antonyms for the following words from the passage.

back - start -lose - harshly -slower - sadness -

51

Activity 8 Speaking

A) Mudalihamy comes back to school after winning the 100 metres

race. Imagine you are his friends and write down the questions that you want to ask him about the competition on pieces of paper and put them into a box.

You may use the question words where, who, when, which, why, how, etc.

e.g. :- Where was the competition held?

B) Complete activity 2 in unit 5 of your workbook.

Activity 9 Speaking

A) Imagine one of you is Mudalihamy. Take the questions one by one

and answer them.B) Now complete activity 3 in unit 5 of your workbook.

Activity 10 Writing

A) Let’s write a letter to Mudalihamy congratulating him on his

victory.

Include the following :- Who you are How you got to know about him How you found his address Your best wishes to him

B) Now, complete activity 4 in unit 5 of your workbook.

52

Activity 11 Reading

A) Read the passage and complete the table.

The History of Footwear

Historically shoes were worn primarily for protection. According to archaelogical evidence, experts believe that shoes were invented about 40,000 years ago. However, it was not until sometime later that footwear was worn by people frequently.

It is hard to imagine a time before the invention of shoes. Yet, what started as a practical venture grew into a varied, booming industry. Though all shoes share basic characteristics, their colouring, materials and designs have transformed drastically over thousands of years.

The earliest shoes were made of soft leather. They resembled either sandals or moccasins. In the early 19th century, women’s and men’s shoes finally began to differ from one another in style, colour, heel, and toe shape. During this era,

shoes were made straight, meaning that there was no differentiation between left and right shoes.

As the 20th century approached, shoemakers improved comfort by making foot-specific shoes. The face of the footwear changed drastically from decade to decade. This was due to the technological advances that made the shoemaking process simpler.

In the early seventies, platform shoes and wedges were popular among women, though they became less so in the eighties and nineties. Men’s shoe trends, however, were mostly static, as the types such as oxfords (leather shoes that fasten with lace) and loafers (leather shoes that you can wear without fastening them) remained the dominant styles.

53

Though men’s shoe styles remained relatively unchanged, women’s shoes made dramatic changes in their appearance.

Women’s shoes became arched, sophisticated and were made to highlight the foot. The heels grew narrower and narrower as time progressed.

At present, the footwear industry has become a thriving business. If footwear trends continue in this fashion, we can expect the shoes of the future to be even more out-of-this-world.

Period What happened

About

40,000 years ago:

In the early 19th

century:

As the 20th

century approached:

In the

early seventies;

In the eighties

and nineties:

B) Now complete activity 5 in unit 5 of your workbook.

moccasin - /ˈmɒkəsɪn/

54

GrammarPay attention to the following sentences taken from the passage ‘The History of Footwear.’

• Historically, shoes were worn primarily for protection.

• According to archaeological evidence, experts believe that shoes

were invented about 40,000 years ago.

• However, it was not until sometime later that footwear was worn

by people frequently.

• The earliest shoes were made of soft leather.

• During this era, shoes were made straight, meaning that there

was no differentiation between left and right shoes.

Learning point

Passive Voice - Past TenseActive sentences in the simple past tense have the following structure:

Subject + past tense form of the verb + objectMy mother made this cake.

Passive sentences in the simple past tense have the following structure:

Subject + was/were + past participle form of the verb + by + doer

of the action.This cake was made by my mother.Sometimes, the doer of the action is not mentioned in the passive sentence when the doer is either not know or not essential for the sentence to be meaningful. e.g. :- This road was repaired last month.

55

Activity 12 Grammar

A) Transform the following into the passive. 1. Rahim wrote a letter yesterday. 2. The dog bit the man. 3. The police arrested the thieves. 4. Did he paint the window? 5. They did not borrow the books. 6. Did Yoga invite you to the party? 7. Somebody helped me when I fell down. 8. The teacher corrected the books. 9. Inura found a purse in the library. 10. A wild elephant destroyed the crops yesterday.

B) Now complete activities 6 &7 in unit 5 of your workbook.

Let’s study the differences between the formats of an informal letter and a formal letter.

Format of an informal letter

Sender’s address

Date

Salutation

Ending

Body of the letter

56

Format of a formal letter

Sender’s address

Date

Salutation

Underlined topic

Receiver’s designation and address

Body of the letter (which usually consists of three paragraphs)

Ending

Activity 13 Reading

Let’s read this formal letter written by the secretary of the Environment Society of Gurulugama Vidyalaya and fill in the table given below it.

Gurulugama Vidyalaya,Kelaniya.20th January 2018

The Director General,Ports Authority,Galle.

Dear Sir,

Request for Permission to Visit the Galle Port

I am the secretary of the Environment Society of Gurulugama Vidyalaya. I am writing this letter to request permission to visit the Galle Port.

57

The grade 9 students of my school wish to visit the Galle Port on 2nd February. We have a team of 350 students and 10 teachers. We hope to reach the Port around 9 o’clock in the morning and hope to stay there for about three hours. We hope that you will be able to provide the services of a guide to help our students.

I would be glad if you could consider this request. I’m looking forward to hearing from you.

Thank you,Yours faithfully,

…………………………Rusith JayaratneSecretaryEnvironmental Society

Sender’s address

Date

Receiver’s designation

Receiver’s address

Salutation

Topic

Complimentary close

Sender’s name

Sender’s designation

58

Activity 14 Writing

A) Imagine you are the secretary of the Science Society of your

school. You have planned to visit a shoe factory in your area to see how shoes are made. Write a letter to the manager of this factory asking for permission to make this visit.

Include the following: The purpose of your visit Number of students and teachers The date and time of your visit Request for permission

B) Now complete the activities 8 & 9 in unit 5 of your workbook.

Activity 15 Listening

Now you are going to listen to a description of how to fix a problem in your computer printer.

Listen to it and complete the flowchart in activity 10 of unit 5 in your workbook.

59

Activity 16 Read and enjoy

Mismatched

My dog thinksshe’s the Easter Bunnyhiding shoeswhen I’m asleep

I’m glad she likesthe way I smellbut somedayI would like to keep

a pair of shoesone left, one rightside - by - sidethroughout the night.

So when I dressto go to townI look like meand not a clown!

Amy Ludwig Vanderwater

60

Activity 1 - Act out

Isuru, Prakash, Anjana, Amandi and Naleem are friends and they are in the same class at school. They are drawing pictures for the school art exhibition.

Isuru : Hey Anjana, can you pass me the red and yellow pastels, please?Anjana : Here’s the yellow one and the red is with Naleem.Naleem : Give me a minute. I’m going to draw something different this time.

6Art

61

Isuru : What do you mean?Naleem : I’m going to show the different expressions of people

in my work of art. Isuru : That sounds great. By the way Amandi, are you going to

use only the pencil for your drawing?Amandi : Yes, I’m drawing portraits of national heroes and world

famous personalities.Anjana : How interesting! We seem to have a number of

specialists with us. Amandi uses the pencil, Prakash the pen and…Prakash : Well, I use charcoal too. Look at this still life drawing

that I’m doing. I have used both pencil and charcoal. Naleem : I find it difficult to use charcoal because I can’t get the

smooth finish that I want for my work with it.Prakash : I see. Hey, it’s a beautiful picture of the rural landscape,

Isuru.Isuru : Thanks. I like to draw pictures of different scenery. My!

Look at the patterns on Anjana’s picture! Prakash : Wow! They are ideal for new fashion designs.Anjana : Thanks. Oh, by the way, are we not going to have any

sculptures at the exhibition?Amandi : Sculptures, carvings and other types of exhibits are

handled by grade 11, 12 and 13.Isuru : That means we are only drawing scenery, portraits, still

life pictures and mm..Prakash : Why? What about cartoons? Shall we draw a few?Isuru : Aha, I forgot it. Yes, that would be better.

62

A) Read the text and state if the following are “True” or “False”. 1. Only five friends are drawing pictures for the exhibition. 2. The friends are using different media of drawing. 3. Isuru has drawn a portrait. 4. Only Isuru and Prakash will draw cartoons. 5. Grade 12 pupils are not responsible for sculptures.

B) Fill in the table.

Name or grade (s) of the

pupil (s)

Type of drawing

Medium used

Isuru............................Pastel

Learning point

Read aloud the highlighted words.

expressions, national, specialists, finish, fashion

Did you hear the sound ‘sh’?

Read aloud the following words

dictation, discussion, decision, correction, commission,

crucial, special, essential, washing

Each of the words has the sound /ʃ/(“sh”) represented by different letter combinations.

63

Activity 2 Speaking

A) Read the following words aloud.

B) Find the letter combinations which produce the/ʃ/ sound. Follow

the example.

fashion, education, pension, special, definition, division, brushing,

crucial, passion, financial, shoulder, potential, mission, professional,

international, partial, impression, musician, initial, possession,

condition, establish, impression

C) Fill in the blanks to form meaningful words.

1. descrip…..n

2. commi…..n

3. beauti…….n

4. demoli…..

5. na…nal

6. protec….n

7. revi….n

8. contribu….n

9. competi…n

10. wa…ing

64

Activity 3 Reading

Study the dictionary page given and answer the questions.

DRAW2 noun 1 : the act or the result of pulling out . The outlaw was quick on the drow.2 : a tie game or contest3 : something or someone that attracts people . The roller coaster is the park’s main draw.

DRAW1 verb ǀ /drƆ:/drew /dru:/ ; drawn/ drƆ:n/ ; drawing1 : to cause to move by pulling . Draw the curtains, please. She drew a chair up to table.2 : to create a picture of by making lines on surface . ǀ drew a map on the chalkboard.3 : to bring or pull out . Draw your sword!4 : to move in a particular direction . He drew back in horror.5 : to bend (a bow) by pulling back the string6 : to move or go slowly or steadily . Spring is drawing near.7 : ATTRACT 2 . The fair drew a crowd . He didn’t want to draw attention to himself. 8 : to get as a response . The speech drew cheers.9 : to bring or get from a source . draw blood10 : INHALE 1 . Draw a deep breath.11 : to let air flow through . The fireplace is drawing well.12 : WITHDRAW 1 . ǀ drew money from the bank.

13 : to take or get at random . We drew names from a hat.14 : to think of after considering information . draw a conclusion15 : to write out in proper from . The lawyer drew up her will. ̶ draw on1 : to make use of something . The story draws on old legends.2 : to come closer . Night draws on. ̶ draw out1 : to make last longer . Questions drew out the meeting.2 : to cause to talk freely . Her friendliness drew out the new student. ̶ draw up 1 : to bring or come to a stop . The car drew up to the door.2 : to straighten up . He drew himself up to his full height.

1. How many word classes are represented by the word “draw’?

2. Write three meanings of the verb “draw” ?

3. Read the following sentences. Write the meaning of the underlined words referring to the dictionary page.

a) I draw pictures for fun.b) She just wanted to draw the attention of the crowd.c) He was drawing water from the well.

4. Write two sentences using the word “draw” as a verb and a noun.

65

Activity 4 Reading

Ravi went into his study to study for his bar exam. He saw an oil patch on the white cloth spread on his study table. “Somebody seems to have come to my study while I was watering my plants”, he said to himself. “ There’s something on the floor too. Is it water or oil?” Then he looked around and saw his son’s toy car on the floor.

Ravi remembered what his son had said in the morning, “My car is sick. Can you do something about it, Dad?” Ravi called out to his son. “Shashi, where are you? I want to talk to you.” Then Shashi replied, “ I’m here in the living room playing with my toys.” Ravi walked into the living room and asked, “Shashi how is your car?” Shashi replied “It’s fine,Dad. I oiled it like you told me to”. “ How did you do it?” Ravi asked. “I mounted the car on your table and serviced it as they do at the service station.” Ravi realized that his son was smart and said, “Next time you service the car, don’t forget to clean the service station too.” Shashi stood up in a flash, ran into the study and started cleaning the table.

Draw a picture to depict this incident.

Learning point

Look at the words highlighted in the above text.

Ravi went into his study1 to study2 for his bar exam.

The word “study” has different functions in the above sentence.

1 a noun

2 a verb

Every morning I get water from the well and water the plants.

NounVerb

66

Activity 5 Grammar

1. Use the highlighted words in the text meaningfully in sentences.

2. Find at least two such other words on your own and write a

sentence using each word.

Activity 6 Act out

The children were happy about their exhibition. The class teacher appreciates their work.

Teacher: I’m really happy about your work children.

Kavindi: Thank you teacher.

Deshan: Thank you for guiding us teacher.

Teacher: Principal asked me to tell you that he had appreciated you all.

Chamathi: Wow, great!

Teacher: OK, so tell me about your future plans.

Chamod: I will be an architect in the future.

Teacher: Good. That means by 2030 you will have worked as an architect. Prakash: Teacher, why do you say like that?

Teacher: That means by that time we will see you as an architect.

67

Learning point

Look at the following sentence taken from the conversation.

That means by 2030 you will have worked as an architect.

The above form is different from the future form.

He will have left by the time you go to see him.

He will not have left by the time you go to see him.

Will he have left by the time you go to see him?

Note how the verb is formed.

will+ have + past participle

It is called the future perfect tense.

Complete the following blanks using the future perfect form.

1) By this time tomorrow I ……….. (complete) my report.

2) It is already six o’clock. He ………. (not/finish) the work by six thirty.

3) By 7 o’clock the kids ……….. (fall) asleep.

4) By next year my father ……… (get) his promotion.

5) My mother ………. (clean) the kitchen soon after lunch.

Activity 7

A) Read the following text and complete the table.

History tells us about many great people in the world. They have made a name for themselves in different fields of study. Leonardo da Vinci is one such person worth mentioning. Born on April 15, 1452, in Vinci, Italy, Da Vinci is known in the world as an exceptional artist, mathematician, inventor, writer, sculptor, draftsman, etc. His knowledge of science and nature is believed to have greatly

68

influenced his work in different fields. The world famous paintings such as “Monalisa”, “Virgin of the Rocks” and “The Last Supper” are among his great works.

Da Vinci as a child received little formal education with nothing beyond basic reading, writing and mathematics instruction. However, his artistic talents were evident from an early age. At the age of 14 he learned technical skills including metalwork, leather arts, carpentry, drawing, painting and sculpture. He learned all these under the noted artist Andrea del Verrocchio in Florence. A pen-and-ink drawing of a landscape of the Arno valley is known as one of his early - dated work which is believed to have been sketched in 1473.

1. Name :2. Place of birth:3. Date of birth:4. Talented fields:5. Work of art:6. Education:7. Technical skills:8. Teacher:

B) In groups, find information about any artist you know (dancer,

singer, painter, sculptor, etc.) and write a similar description.

69

Activity 8 Reading

Read the following text and answer the questions that follow.

Martial Arts Martial art is a form of combat: a traditional form of art found among different nations in different styles. This is practised for self-defence, mental and spiritual development and sometimes for law enforcement. There are two types of martial arts: armed and unarmed. In armed martial arts weapons like swords, shields and daggers are used. However, kicking and punching are commonly used techniques in both armed and unarmed combat.

Styles and techniques used in martial arts differ depending on the application and intention. For example, today many young women learn martial arts for self-defence while some turn to it for mental and spiritual development as well as for physical fitness. Judo, boxing, karate, kickboxing, taekwondo and wrestling are some forms of different types of martial arts.

Angampora or Angam is known as the indigenous fighting art in Sri Lanka. It is believed to have a history which dates back to more than 33000 years. This art is said to have originated from a Yakka warrior. Ancient kings had used this form of fighting art to protect the nation. Angam can be divided into three sections: Angampora, Illangampora and Mayangam. It has been the traditional practice of the Guru to impart Angam knowledge and its secrets only to his most faithful and trustworthy students. Hence, the value and popularity of this form of martial arts has increased over the generations.

A student who takes the Angam oath will enter the training area without headwear or footwear. It is considered as a sacred space made of fine clay and ground coconut fibres. However, the students are trained in different locations such as grasslands, beaches and even swamplands. It is a must for a student to engage in breathing meditation to make his or her combat skills perfect.

70

A) State whether the following are True or False. 1. Martial art is practised only as a form of self-defence. 2. Lots of techniques are used in martial arts. 3. Angampora originated in India. 4. Angampora is the Sri Lankan form of martial arts. 5. Angampora combating style is taught to anybody.

B) Answer the following. 1. What is martial art? 2. Why is it practised? 3. What are the types of martial arts found in the world?

C) Find and write the information asked about Angampora. 1. Practised in: 2. Originated in (period): 3. Originated from: 4. Major sections: 5. Number of weapons used: 6. Rituals:

D) Find similar words from the text for the following. 1. Someone engaged in or experienced in warfare 2. Something you do to protect yourself

E) What do the following words refer to? 1. This (in paragraph 1) 2. his (in paragraph 3)

71

Activity 9 Read and enjoy

I AM AN ARTIST

I am a creator of ideas,swimming in a sparkling sea of imagination

a magician of sorts, turning thoughts of

wonderment into pieces of originality

each creation showcases

my own personal journey

my worries, dreams and ambitions,everything I LOVE and everything I FEAR

All that I was yesterday and all that I’ll be tomorrow

is neatly contained in my glorious creations

when you glance over my work, you are catching

a glimpse of my soul, for a part of ME is in each piece I create

I march to my own beat, and wildly dance to my own rhythm

passion runs through my veins,as emotions are fuel for my craft

certain pieces I protect and keep to myself

while other I’ll share with the world

I am a creative beacon shining my light brightly

for all the universe to see

I am all these things and morerolled into one amazingly talented, unique Artist!

72

Activity 1 - Act out

Quiz

Presenter 1 : Good morning! Dear teachers and friends, we warmly

welcome you to the quiz competition! Please give a round of applause to the competitors, Vihangi, Nethula, Shakthi and Rizvin.

Presenter 2 : And also put your hands together for the panel of

judges, Ms. A. Dissanayake and Mr. S. Subramanium.

7

Where We Are...

73

Presenter 1 : Let me introduce today’s quiz. It has 2 rounds. Both

rounds will be on general knowledge.

Presenter 2 : In the first round, an image will be displayed on the

screen. You will be asked two questions based on it.

You will score 05 points for each correct answer.

Presenter 1 : In the second round, you’ll have to talk about a topic.

Your topic will be given according to the number you select. You’ll be given five minutes to prepare for your speech and you can earn a maximum of 20 points for

your speech.Presenter 2 : Well, hope everything is clear to you. On behalf of

everyone present here today, I wish the competitors the best of luck. Are you ready? Now, let’s begin the

quiz programme.

Activity 2

The following were the images shown in the first round. Match the

types of houses with the names shown below.

castle flatsmansion

igloohouseboat

thatched house

treehousemud houses

teepee

caravan/ trailer

town houses

74

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

75

Activity 3 Speaking

Earth is Our HomeVihangi was given the above topic to speak at the quiz programme.Refer to the following points which she wrote down and deliver a speech to the class.

• all the essential ingredients for life is available. - Oxygen , water, food, etc.• no other planet to live• protection, love, sharing and caring - home• must appreciate and honour the diversity , live in peace and harmony• save the Earth

Activity 4

Prepare a scrap book/picture dictionary on different dwellings. Add a section for animal dwellings too.

Activity 5 Listening

You will now listen to a documentary on the strange habitats of four different animals. Listen and complete the activity.

[A] Listen and number the pictures.

abcd

76

[B] Listen and choose the correct answer.

(1) The strange thing about the jellyfish mentioned here is that ...

(a) they are not in the sea.(b) they are in the Pacific Ocean.(c) they are trapped in a net.

(2) According to the text, the African bullfrog buries itself

underground for many years in order to ....

(a) protect itself from dangerous animals in Africa.(b) hunt small insects in the Savannah.(c) protect its skin from very hot weather in Africa.

(3) Carrier snails use .............................. to decorate their cases.

(a) pebbles and gems(b) shells and pebbles(c) pebbles and sand

(4) The nest of the weaver bird found in Namibia....

(a) cannot be damaged by water.(b) is made of sticks and twigs.(c) is made by female birds.

(5) The documentary is about the strange habitats of a variety of

(a) jelly fish, frogs, spiders and weaver birds.(b) jelly fish, weaver birds, snails and frogs.(c) jellyfish, snakes, snails and weaver birds.

77

Learning point

Future events: next moment / in the evening / tomorrow / next week / in 2030 / in the future

Active voice Passive Voice

will + infinitive verb will + be + past participle

The judges will ask you two You will be asked two questionsquestions. (by the judges).

Will the judges ask him two Will he be asked two questions questions? (by the judges)?

How many questions will the How many questions will he

judges ask him? be asked (by the judges)?

The judges will not ask (won’t ask) Questions will not be askedquestions in the (won’t be asked) in the second second round. round (by the judges).

Activity 6 Grammar

Change the following sentences into passive voice. Omit the doer if it

is not necessary.

1. The Head Prefect will give the welcome speech.

2. They will postpone the match if it rains.

3. They will probably translate his new book into a number of

foreign languages.

4. The security guard will lock the gate.

5. When will they send my exam results?

78

Activity 7 Grammar

At the quiz competition, Nethula was asked to imagine that he was a

a condidate in the presidential election.

He was given the following topic to speak on

If you are elected as the president of the country ...

The following are some extracts from his speech.

Honourable panel of judges,

My main concerns are public property, environment and student

population. So, if I am elected as the president of the country, the

following will be implemented immediately.

First of all, strict laws will be imposed against those who acquire

public property illegally because it has become a threat to the

development of the country.

At the same time, the use of non-eco-friendly material will be

prohibited because we have to take swift action to protect our

environment.

Programmes will be launched immediately to make the public aware

of the importance of saving our natural resources for the benefit of

the future generations.

And also schools will be given additional facilities to improve the

quality of the education they offer.

Imagine that you are going to speak on the same topic and write your

own speech. Use similar structures as highlighted above.

79

Activity 8 Pre-reading

Discuss in your groups and answer.1. What are the most essential necessities of man?2. Why do people need shelter?3. What are the forms of shelter used by the early man?

Activity 9 Reading

Read and answer the questions.

Food, clothing and shelter are the three most essential necessities of man. Since the beginning of human civilisation, human beings have used different types of shelter to shield themselves from the weather, to protect themselves against wild animals and insects, and as a place to rest. In the prehistoric era, man made use of what was found in the natural environment for shelter. Trees, for example, provided him with protection against the heat of the sun, the cold in the winter and the rain. Trees also protected man against animals that could not climb up trees. Later, man shifted to caves for shelter, which provided greater protection against extreme weather conditions. However, they offered less protection against wild animals.

Gradually, man learnt to build a shelter of his own to protect himself. It is believed that man initially made use of bones, stones and even parts of trees to build his shelter. Later, man learnt to use materials like earth which was dried in the sun to form clay blocks. Then, he understood that the blocks of clay became stronger when they were burnt and dried. Man has since then been using different types of material to build houses, including artificially created material. As a result, houses, have changed in shape, form and even size. However, despite the development in the materials used for building houses, it is important to pay attention to the climatic factors

80

when building houses - for example, Inuit houses in the Arctic and houses built in different deserts. Today, there are many kinds of houses in the world and they are called by different names such as cottage, villa, mansion, bungalow, thatched house, flat, etc., depending on the location, size, material used, facilities available, etc.

[A] 1. What kinds of materials were used by early man to build different forms of shelter?

2. According to the text, is it important to consider the climatic factors when building houses? 3. Name some of the types of houses found in the world.

[B] Design a flow chart to show the evolution of the different types

of houses as given in the text.

Shelter made of bones,

stones and parts of

trees

[C] 1. Do you think that it is important to consider the climatic factors when building houses?

2. Take the houses of the Inuit as an example and explain the reason for your answer.

[D] 1. Read the text again and write the highlighted words in your book. Find the meaning of the highlighted words.

2. Fill in the blanks using the most suitable word.

a) People tend to consume a lot of junk food. ............................... they face a lot of health problems. (As a result / However)

81

b) .............................. a baby learns to get up and walk. ( Gradually / Later)c) It was raining heavily. ................................... they managed to reach the place on time. (However / Then)d) Ancient man lived in caves. ............................... they learnt to build houses on their own. (As a result / Later)e) He got low marks at the test. ............................ he realized he should work hard. (Later / Then )

Activity 10 Sing and enjoy

Home on the Range

Oh give me a home where the buffalo roam, (1)where the deer and the antelope play,where seldom is heard a discouraging word,and the skies are not cloudy all day.

Chorus: Home, home on the range, where the deer and the antelope play, where seldom is heard a discouraging word, and the skies are not cloudy all day.

Where the air is so pure, and the zephyrs* so free, (2) the breezes so balmy and light,that I would not exchange my home on the range,for all of the cities so bright.

The Red man was pressed from this part of the west, (3)he’s likely no more to return,to the banks of the Red River where seldom if evertheir flickering campfires burn.

How often at night when the heavens are bright, (4)with the light from the glittering stars,have I stood there amazed and asked as I gazed,

82

if their glory exceeds that of ours.

Oh, I love these wild flowers in this dear land of ours, (5)the curlew I love to hear cry,and I love the white rocks and the antelope flocks,that graze on the mountain slopes high.

Oh give me a land where the bright diamond sand, (6)flows leisurely down in the stream;where the graceful white swan goes gliding along,like a maid in a heavenly dream.

then I would not exchange my home on the range, (7)where the deer and the antelope play;where seldom is heard a discouraging word, and the skies are not cloudy all day.

*/ zefǝ(r) /

To listen to this song please go to....http://www.instamp3.me/download/home-on-the-range-allie-goertz.html

83

Activity 11 Reading

Read the song again and answer the questions given below.

1. Mark True or False.

a) The singer loves the busy city life very much.

b) The singer prefers cloudy days.

c) The singer is going to move to a bright city.

d) The singer loves the scenic beauty of the antelope and

buffaloes.

2. Match the words with their meanings.

word meaning

a) zephyr (i) a young woman

b) flickering (ii) soft gentle wind

c) maid (iii) come back

d) return (iv) to burn or shine unsteadily

3. Fill in the blanks using the idea of the first verse.

“ I like to live in a place where the .................. shines, ........................ roam

freely and herds of .................... and .......................... play happily. There

should not be any ....................................things or words.’’

4. According to the 5th verse, what does the singer appreciate?

5. What is the gliding of the swan compared to in the 6th verse?

6. Pick rhyming words from the song.

e.g. :- play - day

7. Where do you prefer to live, in the countryside or in a city?

Why? Write a paragraph.

84

Activity 1 - Act out

Three friends are talking about an exhibition that is going to be held in their school.

Lasith : I’ve just heard something that will make you all happy.

Abdul : What’s it, Lasith?

Lasith : There’s going to be an exhibition to mark the Environment

Day, which falls next month.

Radha : Wow! Who told you? Lasith : Samith, whom I met at the canteen a little while ago. You

know, those who would like to take part in it should give their names to Ms. Sarojani Weerakoon, who is the teacher-in-charge of the Environment Society.

8

Success through

Creativity

85

Faraz : Where are they going to have it?

Lasith : In the school main hall, where we had a blood donation

camp last month.

Radha : Let’s present something at the exhibition, shall we?

Lasith : That would be great! We need to come up with something

really good.

Radha : Yes. mmm………, what about upcycling?

Faraz : Upcycling? That’s a term which I’ve never heard before!

Activity 2 Reading

Read the above conversation and answer the questions given below.

1. What is the event mentioned?2. Who told Lasith about it?3. Why is it being held?4. What was held in the school main hall last month?5. What does Radha suggest?

Learning point

Relative PronounsThe highlighted words in the conversation are called relative pronouns.

People (personal)

Things (non-personal)subjectwho, thatwhich or thatobjectwhom or thatwhich or thatpossessivewhosewhose

In addition, we use where with nouns that refer to a place and when with nouns that refer to a time.

86

A relative clause, i.e. a clause that begins with a relative pronoun, gives us information about the noun that comes before it.

e.g. :- There’s going to be an exhibition to mark the Environment

Day, which falls next month.

The underlined relative clause tells us something about the Environment Day.There are two types of relative clauses: defining relative clauses and non-defining relative clauses.We use a defining relative clause to indicate which particular person or thing we are talking about.e.g. :- The boy who came first in the essay competition is in my

brother’s class.

The relative clause who came first in the essay competition identifies the noun coming before it. In other words without the relative clause it would be unclear which boy is being talked about. We use a non-defining relative clause to give additional, non-essential information about a person or thing.

e.g. :- Our class teacher, who always comes to school early, is very

kind and hardworking.

The relative clause who always comes to school early merely gives some additional information about our class teacher. In other words, it is not essential for the sentence to be meaningful.It is important to remember that we should use a comma before a non-defining relative clause.e.g. :- I borrowed this novel from Suresh, who lives down our lane.

If the non-defining relative clause comes in the middle of the sentence we should use a comma both before it and after it. e.g. :- Suresh, who reads a lot, loves learning new words.

We do not use the relative pronoun ‘that’ with non-defining relative clauses.

87

Activity 3 Grammar

Fill in the blanks with the relative pronouns given in the box.

who, which, whom, whose, where, when

1) A surgeon is a doctor .......................... performs operations.2) A thermometer is an instrument .......................... is used to measure

temperature.3) Nisam, .......................... is one of my close friends, rang me yesterday.4) I’ve got a cousin .......................... hobby is gardening.5) Tell me a time .......................... we can meet.6) It’s an old movie .......................... title I have forgotten.7) The factory .......................... my uncle works is going to close down.8) My friend Ravi, .......................... we met at the library yesterday,

reads at least two books every month.

Activity 4 Grammar

Add commas where necessary. (Remember not all sentences need them.)

1) This is the dictionary which I bought yesterday.2) My youngest brother who is in grade four can sing well.3) The children’s film ‘Handaya’ which was directed by Titus

Totawatte won an international award.4) Do you know the boy who is standing near the gate?5) Rice which is grown in many Asian countries is the staple food of

Sri Lanka.6) Sujitha whose father works in an embassy has a large collection

of foreign stamps.7) The rice which we had for lunch today was very good.

88

8) Sujitha is the girl whose father works in an embassy.9) Show me the place where the accident took place.10) Raj likes visiting Bandarawela where his uncle has a small tea

factory.

Activity 5 Reading

Upcycling - ‘Turning Trash into Treasure’

Can you remember the last time you dropped an empty yoghurt pot in a litter bin or threw away that cardboard box that your pair of shoes came in? When you were disposing of them, did you pause for a second to think that you might have found some creative use for them? For example, you could well have made a lovely vase with the empty yoghurt pot. That is what is known as upcycling: the process of turning old or disposable materials into something useful and often beautiful.

Upcycling can be beneficial in many ways. To begin with, it gives us the opportunity to tap into our capacity for creative thinking, which, in turn, could help us to cultivate new and useful hobbies. It can also be seen as a good way of saving money and of being thrifty as we think of new uses for things which we would otherwise simply throw away. This, in turn, helps keep the environment clean and beautiful. Furthermore, upcycling may provide people with opportunities for self-employment.

Read the passage and answer the questions.1) What is upcycling?2) What may be converted into a vase?3) Name two advantages of upcycling.4) Find two relative pronouns used in the passage.5) Find words in the passage which mean much the same as the

following: a) advantageous: b) recall: c) a set of steps for doing or making something:

89

Activity 6 Listening

You will hear an announcement about the winners of an upcycling competition. Listen to it and write numbers from 1 to 5 under the relevant pictures in the order the winners have won the places.

...............

...............

...............

...............

...............

(A)(B)(C)

(D)(E)

Activity 7 Speaking

Imagine that the upcycling competition was held in your school. Conduct an interview with the leader of a winning team.

Use question words such as what, how, when, who, why, how long, etc.

90

e.g. :- “Congratulations on winning the ........ place in the upcycling competition. Your creation was truly amazing. How did you get this idea, in the first place?”

Activity 8 Writing

Decide on some object that you can upcycle into something better or more beautiful. Write a set of instructions to show how to do it.

91

Activity 1 - Act out

Once there was a kind and generous king. He looked after his people well. His people, in return, loved him and worked hard to build the country. Their country was very prosperous.

Of course

we are.

We‘re lucky to have such a great king.

Our king

is very just and honest. I like him a

lot.

Long live the

king!

So do I.

9The Greatest

Wealth

92

Unfortunately, as time passed, the king became lazy. He ate a lot of unhealthy food and wasted his time on trivial things. He hated doing routine exercises usually expected of kings. Soon, he became overweight and fell sick often. The king, who had once been active and energetic, was now lethargic and unhappy.

It looks like our king has become a real

lazy bones.

Oh! It’s so hard to walk.

I feel really

tired.

So am I. Doesn’t he

listen to anybody?

No, he doesn’t.

I’m worried

about His Majesty’s

health.

One day.....

Your Majesty, a wise man has come

to our country. He claims he can cure

any sickness.

That’s good

news. Ask him to come to the palace.

Can you please

come to the palace to see our

king, who’s not

well?

I’m sorry I can’t. If the king comes to me, I will cure him. But you have to make sure that he walks all the way here. Otherwise my

treatments won’t work.

93

Next day, the king visited the wise man. It was a long walk to the wise man’s house.

For thirty days, the wise man made the king walk from the palace to his hut saying on each day that he had not yet found the herb for the cure. Gradually, with all the exercise, the king began to lose weight and feel better. On the thirty first day ……

Can you cure

me?

Yes, I can. But I need to find a rare herb to prepare the cure for you. Could you

please come tomorrow?

Do you want

me to walk all this way

again?

Yes. Don’t worry. My medicine will soon make

you better. Er, one other thing, Your Majesty. You have to eat more fruit and

vegetables and cut down on sugar. It will speed up

your recovery.

Are you feeling any better now, Your Majesty?

Yes, I am. I’ve

lost a lot of weight and I can move easily now.

Your Majesty, your unhealthy lifestyle

made you ill and unhappy. All your

riches will be useless if you are not

healthy..

Yes, indeed. The

greatest wealth is health. Thank

you for making

me realize it.

94

Number the sentences in the correct order to form the story.

a. Once upon a time there was a kind- hearted king. [ 1 ]

b. He ruled his country justly and his countrymen loved him. [ ] c. One day, the king heard that a wise man who could cure any illness

had come to his country. [ ] d. The king asked his Chief Minister to bring the wise man to the

palace. [ ]

e. Gradually, the king became lazy and neglected his duties spending

most of his time eating and sleeping. [ ]

f. The wise man refused to come to the palace and said he would

cure the king only if the king visited him. [ ]

g. The wise man asked the king to come back on the following day

saying that he had to find a rare herb for the cure. [ ]

h. For thirty days, the wise man gave the same excuse and made the

king walk back and forth from the palace to his hut. [ ]

i. As a result, he became overweight and sick. [ ]

j. As a result of the long walk, the king lost his excess weight and

began to feel better. [ ]

k. Upon hearing this, the king decided to meet the wise man. [ ]

l. The king thanked the wise man for helping him to realize the

value of good health. [ 12 ]

Activity 2 Reading

Find utterances taken from the picture story that are used to convey the given ideas.

• e.g. :- I also like him. - So do I• I’m also worried about His Majesty’s health. -______________________• Of course we are lucky to have such a great king. - _________________• I’m sorry, I can’t come to the palace. - _______________________________

95

• Yes, I can cure you. - ________________________________________ • Yes, I’m feeling better now. - __________________________________

Activity 3 Speaking

This is a telephone conversation between Pavan and his uncle who is in Dubai. Complete it using the utterances in the box and practise it in pairs.

Uncle Ravi : Hello, Pavan. This is Uncle Ravi.

Pavan: .......................................................................

Uncle Ravi: I’m fine, thanks. How’s everybody?

Pavan: ....................................................................... Uncle Ravi: Pavan, is grandpa at home? Can I speak to him, please?

Pavan: .......................................................................

Uncle Ravi: No, it’s okay. How is he? I hope he’s in good health?

Pavan: .......................................................................

Uncle Ravi: Good! He needs exercises as well. Pavan, why don’t you

encourage him to take a short walk in the evenings? Perhaps you can accompany him.

Pavan: .......................................................................

Uncle Ravi: Thanks, son. Say hello to everybody for me and, er, tell

grandpa that I called. I’ll call him again tomorrow if I have time.

Pavan: .......................................................................

Uncle Ravi: Bye!

96

• We’re all fine, thanks.

• Hi uncle, how are you?

• Yes, he’s fine. He takes his medicine regularly and he is very

careful with his diet.

• I’ll tell him, Uncle Ravi. Bye!

• Grandpa is taking a nap. Shall I wake him up?

• Sure. That’d be fun.

Activity 4

Read the given utterances and do activity 3 in the workbook unit 9.

If we do regular exercises, we will

be healthy.

If you eat a lot of

sweets, you will become overweight.

If it rains, we will

get wet.

If you drink a lot of milk, you will have strong bones and teeth.

If you get wet, you will catch a

cold.

If I go to the pharmacy, I will

buy a roll of

bandage.

97

Learning point

Conditional Sentences Type 1

Type 1 conditional sentences are used to refer to:

• actions that are likely to happen (realistic situations)

The result will happen only if the condition is fulfilled.Form:If clause (condition) Main clause (result)

If + simple present tense, simple future tense

If I go to the pharmacy, I will buy a roll of bandage.If the if - clause comes first, you should use a comma to separate the two clauses.The main clause can come before the if clause.

When this happens, we do not use a comma to separate the two clauses.

• I will buy a roll of bandage if I go to the pharmacy.

Activity 5 Grammar

Refer to the table and build conditional sentences. Make the necessary punctuation and capitalization changes.

If

I find your book

I visit Trincomalee

it doesn’t rain today

it rains today

Ruwani comes to school today

our team wins the match today

I will bathe at the hot water springs

I will bring it to you

they will call off the match

they will be the champions

the teacher will give her a role in the play

I will water the plantse.g. :- If I find your book, I will bring it to you.

98

Activity 6 Writing

Use your own ideas and complete these clauses to form conditional sentences.

1. If I’m hungry, ………………………………..2. If my friend Ram visits me, ……………………………….. 3. ………………………… if you don’t study hard.4. If Sachini catches the 6 o’clock train, ………………………………..5. If they like the house, ………………………………..6. I will make some tea ………………………………..7. ……………………………….., I will tidy up the room.

Learning point

Conditional Sentences Type 2

Type 2 conditional sentences are used when the action or situation in the if-clause is

1. unlikely to happen e.g. :- If I saw a robbery, I would call the police. or2. contrary to fact i.e. the opposite of the real situation. e.g. :- If I knew his phone number, I would give him a call.

(real situation - I don’t know his phone number.)Form:If clause (condition) Main clause (result)If + simple past tense, would + verb

• It is important to remember that although the past tense

is used in the if –clause, (knew/saw) the meaning is either present or future, NOT past.

The main clause can come before the if clause.

99

e.g. :- I would give him a call if I knew his phone number. or If I knew his phone number, I would give him a call.

• ‘Were’ can be used with any subject (PLURAL OR SINGULAR).

e.g. :- If I were a bird, I would fly around the world.

If he were here, he would help us.• However, nowadays people tend to use ‘was’ with singular

subjects.

e.g. :- If I was a bird, I would fly around the world.

If he was here, he would help us.

Activity 7 Grammar

Match the clauses and form meaningful sentences.

• If I knew Sahan’s address, if I had more time. • I would sail around the world there would be more vehicles on the road.

• If today was Monday, if the earth suddenly stopped spinning?

• I would learn to play a musical the crops would grow better. instrument

• If we had more rain, if I had a ship.

• If my uncle had a motorbike, he would take me for a ride.

• What would happen I would send him a birthday card.

100

Activity 8 Reading

Physical Fitness and the Value of Exercise

Physical fitness refers to being healthy in body. Being physically fit gives us the ability to engage in daily activities and sports without being unduly tired. Together with nutrition, rest and relaxation, physical exercises also play a major role in determining the level of a person’s physical fitness.

There are many ways that exercises help us to be healthy. When we exercise, we burn calories and when we burn calories regularly, we do not become overweight. Thus, exercising is very useful in maintaining a healthy weight. It also helps to improve heart and lung health besides increasing our energy levels. Another advantage is that regular physical exercises also contribute to preventing illnesses.Exercising brings down unhealthy cholesterol levels and minimises the risk of heart disease. Apart from that, when you are physically active, you sleep better at night. A good night’s sleep relaxes and rejuvenates your body. As a result, you feel refreshed and stress-free.

In modern society, addiction to television, smart phones and computers tends to keep people away from physical activities. This is very harmful to our health. Contrary to what some may believe, exercising does not have to be tedious or monotonous. It does not have to be merely stretching, running or lifting weights . It can be an enjoyable activity such as hiking, swimming, cycling or dancing. You can turn it into a social event which you can enjoy with your friends. This way it will boost not only your physical well-being but your mental well-being too.

101

1. Read the text and complete the diagram.

Physical exercises help to

...........................................................

...........................................................

...........................................................

...........................................................

...........................................................

2. Find synonyms for these words from the text.

dull : ..................................

restore : ..................................

reduce : ..................................

3. Find words from the text that have opposite meanings to these words.

useless :..................................

healthy :..................................

disadvantage: ..................................

Activity 9 Reading and Writing

STEP 1

Read the given short descriptions.

We touch many surfaces with our hands. Therefore it is important to wash our hands before and after

eating and after using

the toilet.

Immunization minimizes the risk of getting dangerous diseases

like polio, diphtheria and tuberculosis. Getting yourself

vaccinated at the right time

is a must to prevent such

diseases.

102

Diseases can spread through personal items like towels, combs, dining plates and drinking

glasses. Therefore, they should

not be shared with anybody.

Vitamins give us immunity against diseases. Taking a balanced meal with plenty of

fruit and vegetables helps

us to fight diseases.

Inactive lifestyle is unhealthy. Doing exercises regularly helps our

bodies to be strong and

healthy.

We need enough sleep to restore our bodies. Sleep also helps

our bodies to grow and

strengthen our

memory.

STEP 2Now rewrite the following jumbled sentences correctly.

I. hands/wash/using/before/and/eating/toilet/after/the/and/aftere.g. :- Wash hands before and after eating and after using the toilet.

II. don’t/personal/such/towels/with/combs/share/belongings/as/others/and

III. regularly/do/ to/be/and/healthy/strong/exercises/

IV. diseases/get/dangerous/vaccinated/against.

V. balanced/eat/plenty/with/meal/vegetables/a/fruit/of/and

VI. sleep/get/enough

STEP 3

Dengue has become an epidemic in Sri Lanka due to our negligence. We have created unnecessary space for mosquitoes to breed excessively. Yet, with a little effort and commitment, we can get rid of this menace.

103

Write five instructions on “How to Prevent Dangerous Types of Mosquitoes from Breeding Rapidly”. You may make use of the given vocabulary.

plantcleandon’t

throw

remove

gutterscontainers

leaves

turn over

bucketsplants such as Basil

hold out

rainwaterregularlyrepel mosquitoesenvironment

Learning point

Affixes

An affix is added to the beginning or the end of a word to form a new word.

e.g. :- healthy –unhealthy polite- impolite neat- neatness

prefixes suffixes* added to the beginning * added to the end of a word of a wordun-happy unhappy ful/fully - beauty beautiful/beautifullydis- advantage disadvantage less - use uselessim – patient impatient ness - fit fitness ment - agree agreement ation/ ion -recommend recommendation ation/ ion - prevent prevention able - adore adorable

ly - sad sadly

• Prefixes change the meaning of the word.

• Suffixes change the word class.

forget (verb) forgetful (adjective)happy (adjective) happiness (noun)angry (adjective) angrily (adverb)

104

Activity 10 Grammar & Vocabulary

Add the prefixes un/dis/im/ in to form the opposites of these words.wrap agree connect ability possible fold

Activity 11 Grammar & Vocabulary

Combine the words with the suitable affixes to form meaningful words.

tidyun likedis clearim wanted mobile balance

hour ablecomfort lesssuit lygovern menttreat nesssweettooth

Activity 12 Grammar and Vocabulary

Complete each sentence using the word given in brackets in its correct form.• The little puppy is ……………………………. (adore)

• The baby played ………… (happy) with his toys.

• The two companies signed an ……... (agree) yesterday.

• We still haven’t found a ……………… (suit) actor for the character.

• Thank you for the books you lent me. They were very ……….....

(use).

105

Activity 13 Listening

In this listening lesson you will hear a dialogue between a doctor and a patient. Listen to it and select the correct answer.

1. The patient’s symptoms are a) a sore throat, a headache and a runny nose. b) stomach ache, vomiting and a skin rash.

2. The patient has a) high fever. b) no fever.

3. The patient has had the symptoms for a) a week. b) two days.

4. The patient should take the medicine ………… times a day. a) two b) three

5. The patient should drink ………. a) plenty of water and other fluids. b) only a glass of water at a time.

Activity 14 Speaking

Look at the picture and prepare a short description about the picture of the hospital. Present your description to the class. You may use the vocabulary given below.

106

admissions

OPD/Out Patients Department

pushing

wheelchair

nurse

stethoscope

wardsdoctor

line/queuetrolley

kneeling

helping

Activity 15 Writing

Write a small description about the picture of the hospital using the vocabulary given above.

107

Activity 1 - Act out

The teacher has given the students an application form to fill in the three optional subjects that they hope to study in grade ten. Nisali and her friends are discussing the optional subjects they hope to select.

Kalani : When do we hand over the application?

Nisali : On or before the 15th. Have you decided on the three subjects you want to follow?

Kalani : Oh, that’s the hardest decision. I don’t know what to choose.

Amali : Me neither. I like almost all these subjects.

Raju : Come on! You can only select three.

Nisali : Mmm… I’m going to select English Literature. I like it.

Amali : I like it too but my mother wants me to do Art.

Raju : That’s a good decision. I’ve seen your drawings and they are quite good.

Amali : Oh! Thank you, Raju.

Kalani : Can I change the subjects once I have selected them? I mean if they’re too difficult for me? Nisali : No. I don’t think so.

10Be Happy, be Bright,

be You!

108

Amali : Shouldn’t we discuss this with our parents before we make a decision?

Kalani : Yes, we should.

Raju : Hey, what’s this? Do you know anything about Design and Technology?

Nisali : Design and Technology? It’s the first time I’ve heard of it.

Raju : Let’s meet our teacher and ask her. She’s sure to know about it.Activity 2 Reading

Read the conversation and answer the questions.1. What are the friends talking about?2. How many subjects should they select?3. Who likes English Literature?4. What does Amali’s mother want her to do?5. Are they allowed to change the subjects they select?6. Why is Raju going to meet the teacher?

GrammarRaju met the teacher. The teacher wanted to know about their discussion. This is how Raju reported their conversation to the teacher.

“I’m going to select English

Literature”

“Can I change

the subjects

once I have selected them ?”

“My mother wants me to do

Art”

109

Nisali said that she was going to select English Literature. (Statement)Kalani asked whether she could change the subjects once she had selected them. (Question)Amali said that her mother wanted her to do Art. (Statement)

Learning point

Reported speech

If we report what another person has said, we usually do not use the speaker’s exact words (direct speech), but we use reported speech (indirect speech). When reporting, the following changes can occur in the reported statement.• A backshift in the tense Present tense Past tense Past tense Past perfect tense Present perfect tense Past perfect tense Past perfect tense Past perfect tense• A change in pronouns • A change in time and place expressions Today that day Yesterday the day before / the previous day Last week the week before / the previous week Next week the following week Tomorrow the next day / the following day Now then Here there This that

The structure of reporting is a little different depending on

whether you report an imperative, a question or a statement.

110

ImperativesTypeExampledirect speech“Amali, do Art.”reported speechShe told Amali to do Art.

StatementsTypeExampledirect speech“I like English Literature.”reported speech(no backshift)

She says that she likes English Litera-ture.reported speech(backshift)

She said that she liked English Litera-ture.

QuestionsTypeExampleWh questions

direct speech“When do we have to hand over the application?”reported speech

He asked when they had to hand over the application.Yes/no questions

direct speech“Can I change the subjects?”reported speech

She asked whether / if she could change the subjects.

Activity 3 Grammar

Write the following in reported speech.

1. The teacher said to us, “You need to select three optional subjects.”2. Farzana said to me, “ I have to buy some stamps.”3. My parents said to me, “Don’t get late.”4. Prathiba asked me,“Where did you go yesterday?”5. Inura asked Mihiri, “Can you lend me your notes tomorrow?”

*Now complete activities 1 & 2 in Unit 10 of your workbook.

111

Activity 4 Listening

You are going to listen to a description of the favourite optional subjects selected by a group of students.

Listen to the description and label the graph in activity 3 of unit 10 of your workbook.

*Now complete activities 3 & 4 in unit 10 of your workbook.

Activity 5 Reading

But he did not give up…

At around 5:30 in the evening on December 10, 1914, a huge explosion broke out in West Orange, New Jersey. It happened in the famous inventor Thomas Edison’s plant. In no time most of the buildings were in flames. Although many fire departments rushed to the scene, the fire was too powerful to be put out quickly.

Edison’s 24-year-old son Charles painfully watched the fire destroy his father’s work. Edison calmly walked over to him. In a soft voice he told his son, “Go and call your mother and all her friends. They’ll never see a fire like this again.” When Charles objected, Edison said, “It’s all right. We’ve just got rid of a lot of rubbish.” Edison could have wept, yelled in anger, or locked himself in his house in a state of depression. But instead, he put on a smile and told his son to call his mother to enjoy the spectacle.

Later, at the scene of the blaze, Edison told one of the reporters, “Although I am over 67 years old, I’ll start all over again tomorrow.” He stuck to his word and immediately began the crucial task of rebuilding his plant.

112

The flames had destroyed years of priceless records and prototypes. But after just three weeks, with a loan from his friend Henry Ford, Edison got a part of the plant up and running again. His employees worked double shifts and set to work producing more than ever. Edison became a legend in history because he did not give up easily.

Activity 6 Reading

Read the passage ‘But he did not give up’ and answer the questions.1. What happened on December 10, 1914?2. Where did this incident happen?3. What did Edison want his son and the reporter to do ?4. What did Edison tell his son?5. How did edison react to the incident?6. Who helped Edison with a loan?

113

Learning point

Classification of nounsCONCRETE / ABSTRACT NOUNS:

• Concrete nouns refer to physical things: people, objects, places,

substances• Abstract nouns refer to events, states, activities, occasions, etc. COUNT/ MASS NOUNS:

• Count nouns refer to things that can be counted, and so can

have a plural form. table – tables

• Mass nouns refer to substances, qualities, etc. that are not

countable. Mass nouns normally have no plural form.

However, the same noun may belong to both categories:

Her hair is brown. (mass noun)

I found a hair in my soup. (count noun)

PROPER/COMMON NOUNS:

• Proper nouns denote an individual person, place, etc. It generally has no plural form. A proper noun normally begins with a capital letter: Gayan, Eheliyagoda, Sri Lanka

• Common nouns classify things into types. All the count and

mass nouns discussed above are common nouns. dog, tree, water

114

Activity 7 Vocabulary

Write the following nouns taken from the passage in the correct column.

Charlesrubbishfire

plantWest Orangehistory

Henry

New Jersey

word

Edisondepression

flametask

workspectacle

Common NounsProper NounsCount NounsMass Nouns

*Now complete activity 5 in unit 10 of your workbook.

Activity 8 Reading

A Day without the Sun

Have you ever wondered how important the Sun is to us here on Earth? What would happen if the Sun suddenly disappeared?

The Sun is a star and it is the centre of our solar system. Everything in our solar system revolves around the Sun. Therefore, the Sun is crucial to life on Earth as well as to the existence of all the

115

other planets around us.

The Sun’s immense mass draws all the other planets in the solar system towards it. Since the Earth and all the other planets are moving very fast through space, the Sun’s presence keeps them moving around it. If the Sun were to suddenly disappear, the Earth and the other planets would continue their forward motion, and fly off into outer space in a straight line.

So what would happen to us if the Sun suddenly went out? As light from the Sun takes eight and a half minutes to reach the Earth, we wouldn’t notice it immediately but nine minutes later, we’d find ourselves in complete darkness.

As the Sun was illuminating the Moon, it too would disappear! The same would happen to many other celestial bodies in the sky, such as planets, which we see only because of the Sun’s reflected light. They too would disappear in a similar fashion like the Moon.

Without the Sun’s warmth, Earth would quickly become a much colder place. Fortunately, Earth retains enough heat fairly well, so humans would not freeze instantly. But within a year, the global surface temperature could drop well below -1000 F! However, with time it will continue to drop to about -4000 F.

Without the Sun’s rays, all photosynthesis on Earth would stop. All plants would die and, eventually, all animals that rely on plants for food — including humans — would die, too. While some inventive humans might be able to survive on a Sun-less Earth for several days, months, or even years, life without the Sun would eventually prove to be impossible on Earth.

116

Activity 9 Reading

Match the paragraphs with the subheadings.• No Sun, no light! • Food without the Sun• Sun and other planets • The star called the Sun• The Sun and its warmth • The Sun and the Moon

*Now complete activity 6 in unit 10 of your workbook.

Activity 10 Pronunciation

Pronounce the following words taken from the passage ‘A day without the Sun.” /ʃ/ /f/crucial enoughfashion freezemotion photosynthesis

Activity 11 Pronunciation

Copy this table and write three more words with similar sounds for each column. Compare your list with your friend’s. Pronounce the words you have written.

/ʃ//f/

crucialfashionmotionenoughfreezephotosynthesis

*Now complete activity 7 in unit 10 of your workbook.

117

Activity 12 Reading

Here is a story of two groups of people who had the courage and determination to overcome adversity through innovation.

They brought the sun down!

The villages of Rjukan, Norway, and Viganella, Italy, are both situated in deep valleys. The mountains around these valleys block the sun’s rays from reaching the two villages for up to six months every year. Therefore, neither Rjukan nor Viganella enjoys the luxury of sunlight like we do. Can you imagine the lives of people in these villages without sunlight for almost six months?

This is how they have brightened their day.To illuminate those darker winter months, the two villages have built huge mirrors that track the sun and reflect daylight downwards. Viganella completed its huge computer-controlled mirror in 2006. Rjukan also followed the same method , mounting a mirror that will reflect a 600 square metre (6,500 square foot) beam of sunshine into the town square below.

*Now complete activity 8 in unit 10 of your workbook.

118

Activity 13 Writing

Imagine you are the secretary of the New Inventors’ Club of your school. You are planning to invite a university lecturer to deliver a speech on ‘Using Solar Power Innovatively’ to the members of the society. Write a notice to inform the members about this.

Include the following:

The event Name of the guest speaker Date and time Venue Who can participate/ attend

*Now complete activity 9 & 10 in unit 10 of your workbook.

Activity 14 Writing

Find information about people who overcame many hardships on their way to success.Write a biographical sketch about one of them for your school wall newspaper.

e.g. :- Pabilis Silva Abraham Lincoln J. K. Rowling Charles Dickens

119

Activity 15 Reading

Enjoy reading this poem and do the activities that follow.

Be Yourself

The world would like to change you;there are pressures all around.You must decide just who you are,then firmly hold your ground.

You have an image of yourself,an ideal sense of you;and to this vision you must alwaysstruggle to be true.

You know what you are good at,and you know where talents lie;but if you’re ruled by others,your uniqueness could pass by.

Remember there is much to learn;but all new things aren’t good.Wisdom lies in what you’ve learnedand what you have withstood.

So, be yourself and don’t allowthe world to take control.Preserving your identityis life’s most precious goal.

Bruce B. Wilmer

120

Activity 16 Reading

1. How many stanzas are there in this poem?2. Write down all the rhyming words.3. List down five different pieces of advice given by the poet.4. What is life’s most precious goal according to the poet?5. Find synonyms for the following words from the poem.

a. strictlyb. controlledc. valuable *Now complete activity 11 in unit 10 of your workbook.

Activity 17 Speaking

Game- Ten Questions.

The poet in BE YOURSELF says “All new things aren’t good”. Form groups and in your groups think of something in modern society which, you think, is not good for young children. Now, one member from your group will go in front of the class. The other students of the class must guess the item that you and your group discussed. The rest of the class can ask up to TEN questions from your group member about the name of the item that they have to guess.

e.g.:- Where can you find it? What colour is it? Who uses it most?