==== BLOCKS ==== 

i

Grade 6

GEOGRAPHY

Educational Publications Department

ii

First Print - 2014

Second Print - 2015

Third Print - 2016

Fourth Print - 2017

Fifth Print - 2018

Sixth Print - 2019

All Rights Reserved

ISBN 978-955-25-0082-4

Published by Educational Publications DepartmentPrinted by Neo Graphics (Pvt) Ltd,No. 44, Udahamulla Station Road, Gangodawila, Nugegoda.

iii

The National Anthem of Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Sundara siri barinee, surendi athi sobamana Lanka Dhanya dhanaya neka mal palaturu piri jaya bhoomiya ramya Apa hata sepa siri setha sadana jeewanaye matha Piliganu mena apa bhakthi pooja Namo Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha Oba we apa vidya Obamaya apa sathya Oba we apa shakthi Apa hada thula bhakthi Oba apa aloke Apage anuprane Oba apa jeevana we Apa mukthiya oba we Nava jeevana demine, nithina apa pubudukaran matha Gnana veerya vadawamina regena yanu mana jaya bhoomi kara Eka mavakage daru kela bevina Yamu yamu vee nopama Prema vada sema bheda durerada Namo, Namo Matha Apa Sri Lanka Namo Namo Namo Namo Matha

iv

wms fjuq tl ujlf. orefjdatl ksjfiys fjfikdtl mdge;s tl reêrh fõwm lh ;=< ÿjkd

tneúks wms fjuq fidhqre fidhqßfhdatl f,i tys jefvkdÔj;a jk wm fuu ksjfiafid¢k isáh hq;= fõ

ieug u fu;a lreKd .=fKkSfj<S iu.s oñkSrka ñKs uq;= fkd j th u h iem;dlsis l, fkdu Èrkd

wdkkao iurfldaka

xU jha; kf;fs; ehkhNthk;xd;Nw ehk; thOk; ,y;yk;ed;Nw clypy; XLk;xd;Nw ek; FUjp epwk;

mjdhy; rNfhjuu; ehkhNthk;xd;wha; thOk; tsUk; ehk; ed;wha; ,t; ,y;ypdpNyeyNk tho;jy; Ntz;Lkd;Nwh

ahtUk; md;G fUizAld;xw;Wik rpwf;f tho;e;jpLjy;nghd;Dk; kzpAk; Kj;Jky;y - mJNtahd;W kopahr; nry;tkd;Nwh.

Mde;j rkuf;Nfhd; ftpijapd; ngau;g;G.

v

Being innovative, changing with right knowledge,Be a light to the country as well as to the world.

Message from the Hon. Minister of Education

The past two decades have been significant in the world history due to changes that took place in technology. The present students face a lot of new challenges along with the rapid development of Information Technology, communication and other related fields. The manner of career opportunities are liable to change specifically in the near future. In such an environment, with a new technological and intellectual society, thousands of innovative career opportunities would be created. To win those challenges, it is the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government and myself, as the Minister of Education, to empower you all.

This book is a product of free education. Your aim must be to use this book properly and acquire the necessary knowledge out of it. The government in turn is able to provide free textbooks to you, as a result of the commitment and labour of your parents and elders.

Since we have understood that the education is crucial in deciding the future of a country, the government has taken steps to change curriculum to suit the rapid changes of the technological world. Hence, you have to dedicate yourselves to become productive citizens. I believe that the knowledge this book provides will suffice your aim.

It is your duty to give a proper value to the money spent by the government on your education. Also you should understand that education determines your future. Make sure that you reach the optimum social stratum through education.

I congratulate you to enjoy the benefits of free education and bloom as an honoured citizen who takes the name of Sri Lanka to the world.

Akila Viraj Kariyawasam Minister of Education

vi

Foreword

The educational objectives of the contemporary world are becoming more complex along

with the economic, social, cultural and technological development. The learning and teaching

process too is changing in relation to human experiences, technological differences, research

and new indices. Therefore, it is required to produce the textbook by including subject related

information according to the objectives in the syllabus in order to maintain the teaching

process by organizing learning experiences that suit to the learner needs. The textbook is not

merely a learning tool for the learner. It is a blessing that contributes to obtain a higher

education along with a development of conduct and attitudes, to develop values and to obtain

learning experiences.

The government in its realization of the concept of free education has offered you all the

textbooks from grades 1-11. I would like to remind you that you should make the maximum

use of these textbooks and protect them well. I sincerely hope that this textbook would assist

you to obtain the expertise to become a virtuous citizen with a complete personality who

would be a valuable asset to the country.

I would like to bestow my sincere thanks on the members of the editorial and writer boards as

well as on the staff of the Educational Publications Department who have strived to offer this

textbook to you.

W. M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka,

Commissioner General of Educational Publications,

Educational Publications Department,

Isurupaya,

Battaramulla.

2019.04.10

vii

Monitoring and Supervision - W.M. Jayantha Wickramanayaka Commissioner General of Educational Publications Educational Publications Department Direction - W.A. Nirmala Piyaseeli Commissioner of Educational Publications (Development) Educational Publications Department Co-ordination - R.A.D. Nandani Rupasinghe Deputy Commissioner (2015) Educational Publications Department - Dakshina Kasturiarachchi Assistant Commissioner (2017-2019) Educational Publications Department

Panel of Editors

1. Prof. N.K. Dhangalla - University of Kelaniya (Professor Emeritus)

2. Prof. S.A. Norbert - University of Colombo

3. R.P. Peiris - Additional Commissioner (Retired), Department of Examinations

4. Hayasinth Dahanayake - Chief Editor (Retired), Educational Publications Department 5. R.A.D.N. Rupasinghe - Deputy Commissioner, Educational Publications Department 6. M.P. Ranjani Dhanawardhana - Director, Department of Social Science, National Institute of Education

7. S. Karunagaran - Lecturer, National Institute of Education

Panel of Writers

1. W. Kanthi perera - Teacher Service, Dhanawardhana St. Peter's College, Negombo

2. W. Shayamani perera - Teacher Service, Dhanawardhana Holy Family Balika M.V. Wennappuwa

3. R.M. Somawathi - ISA, Zonal Education Office, Bandarawela

viii

4' Karunasinghe Somadasa - ISA (English Medium), Zonal Education Office, Matara

5. D.T.C.Wijewardhana - Teacher Service, Holy Family Balika M.V. Wennappuwa.

6. A.S.M. Fareedah - Teacher Service, Muslim Ladies' College, Colombo 04

7. Yalini Karunagaran - Teacher Service, St. Clare's College, Colombo 06 Language Editor

W.Indumini Darshika - Assistant Commissioner, Educational Publications Department

Proof Reader

D.M.J.Bandara - Teacher Service, Kuli/ Saranath Maha Vidyalaya, Kuliyapitiya

Cover Design

R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi - Computer Assistant, Educational Publications Department

Computer Designing & Formatting (Maps, Figures and Computer Page Designing)

1. R.A.Ureka Dilrukshi - Computer Assistant, Educational Publications Department

2. V.G.Dayana Dilrukshi - Development Officer, Educational Publications Department

ix

Note of the Board of Writers / Editors

This textbook has been prepared for you who begin to study Geography from grade six to provide the opportunity to study about the immediate surroundings of your home/ school and our country in a simple way.

The information shown under the immediate surroundings of your school and home, such as the location, physical landscape, weather, flora and fauna and day to day activities of the people in your area are familiar to you. While learning the above information your attention is focused on learning about the protection of the environment and its sustainable development.

The book has also provided the opportunity for you to build the basic concepts of maps which are necessary for Geography.

This textbook has been written giving importance for activities and assignments which can be completed under the guidance of teachers and it would also become a practical work book for you. Accordingly, the relevant pictures, photographs, maps, diagrams, grids and data are included in this book.

The main objective of this textbook is to provide a basic geographical knowledge to you through an active and pleasant learning environment.

Determine to be a little Geographer of the environment at the end of the year by learning these information with a keen interest.

x

xi

Contents Page

1. The School and its Immediate Surroundings 01

Identifying the Location of a School 01Weather Conditions of the Immediate Surroundings of the School 10

Landscape of the Immediate Surroundings of the School 17

2. Nature of the Land in the Immediate Surroundings of the House 22

Plant and Animal Diversity 24Human Activities in the Immediate Surroundings of Your School / House 28

3. Good Maintenance of the Immediate Surroundings of Your Home 38

Disposal of Waste Materials 53

4. Location of Sri Lanka 56

Important Places Located in Sri Lanka 59

Other Islands in the World 61

For Free Distribution»

»

1

Children are the most important treasure in our society. The child receives his basic education to mould his life from his childhood, from his parents and elders in the family. As the child grows, the school becomes the formal institution that provides education. There is a large number of schools in Sri Lanka. They are located in rural, urban, hilly and coastal environments.

Province

District

School

Divisional SecretariatDivision

GramaNiladhariDivision

The objective of this lesson is to guide you how to indicate the location of your school appropriately.

Observe figure 1.1. The Grama Niladhari Division is the smallest administrative unit in which the school is located. The Grama Niladhari Division is made up of one or more villages.

Figure 1.1The location of your school in the divisional administrative hierarchy

There can be several Grama Niladhari Divisions in a city. Every Grama Niladhari Division has a number and a name. There may be several Grama Niladhari Divisions in a Divisional Secretariat.

Identifying the Location of a School

It may be easy for you to answer if someone asks the name of the village or the town in which the school is located. However, it is not that easy to answer when someone asks the location of your school according to the administrative division.

The School and its Immediate Surroundings

1

For Free Distribution

»

»

2

Observe Map 1.1. Letter ‘X’ indicates the location of the Dikwela National School. You too can get a similar map from the Grama Niladhari of the Grama Niladhari Division to which your school belongs.

Activities

With the help of your teacher, present the following information about the location of your school.

1. • Village or town • Name and number of the Grama Niladhari Division

• Divisional Secretariat Division • District • Province in which your school is located.

2. Write five sentences about the location of your school in relation to the information you obtained.

Map1.1Location of the school in the Grama Niladhari Division

SingakkuliyaGN Division

GN Office

DikwelaNational School

DikwelaGN Division

ThambakandaGN Division

YogiyanaGN Division

X

N

eg

o

m

bo

-

K

ur

un

eg

ala

M

ain

R

oad

TempleChurch

Maha Oya

A district constitutes a collection of several Divisional Secretariat Divisions. Two or more districts make a province which is the largest administrative division in the country.

For Free Distribution»

»

3

Map 1.2 Provinces and Districts of Sri Lanka

1. Trace the map you obtained from the Grama Niladhari and mark the place where your school is located.

2. Name 5 public places located in the immediate surroundings of your school.

Assignments

Marking the Location of the School on a Map of Sri Lanka

Map 1.2 indicates the districts and the provinces in Sri Lanka.

For Free Distribution

»

»

4

01. Observe map 1.2 and prepare a table including the provinces and the districts that belong to each province.

02. Trace a map of Sri Lanka that includes provinces and districts. Shade the province that your school is in, with a light colour and the district with a dark colour and name them.

03. With your teacher’s instructions, mark and name the village or the town in which your school is located.

04. Name the other districts bordering the district in which your school is located.

With the instructions of your teacher, write names of five schools located in different provinces of Sri Lanka.

ProvinceDistrict

Normally, we use the name of the educational division, zone, district and the province along with the name of the school to indicate the identity of the school.

B. Jaf/Manipai Hindu College, Manipai, Jaffna.

School 'B' is located in the Jaffna district.

Assignment

Activities

A. NWP/CH/WEN/ Dikwela Primary School, Yogiyana.

School 'A' is located in the educational division of Wennappuwa, in the educational zone of Chilaw in the North Western province.

For Free Distribution»

»

5

Figure 1.2Location of a school garden

Shape of the Land of the School

Figure 1.2 shows a location of a school premises. The parapet wall and the fence indicate the boundaries of the land. We can identify the shape of the land with the help of the boundaries. The picture shows buildings in the school premises, a bank and roads located close to the school.

Figure 1.3 shows the plan of that school premises. Letter ‘X’ indicates the Grade six class in the plan. All the features shown in figure 1.2 are marked on the plan using different symbols. Compare the picture and the plan to identify the differences.

For Free Distribution

»

»

6

Figure 1.3Plan of the school garden

Figure 1.4Diagram of directions

North

South

South West South East

North East North West

East West

Boundary

Well

Wall

Wall

X

Canteen Office Laboratory

Main road

BankofCeylon

Building

Building

Tree

Identification of the Direction

Indication of the direction is important when drawing a plan. We use a compass to find the direction correctly. Use the compass at school and find out the direction of North of the classroom. You can identify other directions as well, when you identify the North.

N

For Free Distribution»

»

7

Look at figure 1.4 and fill in the blanks.

I. ………………….. is located between North and East.

II. …………………. is located between South and East.

III. ………………. is located between South and West.

IV. …………………. is located between West and North.

1. Use figure 1.3 as an example. Draw a plan of your school garden and mark your Grade six classroom, using a symbol.

2. Mark the specific places of your school on that plan, such as the library, laboratory and the principal’s office.

3. Name the directions of those places from your classroom.

Figure 1.5Identification of the directions

Activity

Activities

You can identify the directions according to the direction of the sunrise in the morning, if a compass is not available. When you stand facing the rising sun, stretching your hands, your right hand points to the direction of the South. The opposite direction to which your left hand is pointed, is the North. Accordingly, you can identify the other directions. Here, you can see your shadow behind you. Look at figure 1.5.

For Free Distribution

»

»

8

Figure 1.6Directions of the public places from the school

School

B

M

P

GH

R

To The East

To The South

To The North East

To The North West

B – Bank G – Playground

M – Market R – Reservoir

H – Hospital P – Post Office

Observe figure 1.6 and name the directions of the above places as you observe them from school.

N

Indicating the Directions of Some Selected Places from the School

Figure 1.6 shows two models that indicate directions.

Activity

Assignment

1. Draw a plan similar to the above, to indicate the places located in the surroundings of your school with your teacher’s instructions.

² First indicate the North of the plan.

For Free Distribution»

»

9

² Select a few public places of the immediate surroundings of your school which you can identify clearly. Indicate their locations in the map, according to the direction. ² Mention the distance to each of the places in metres or kilometres approximately. ² Present a key to indicate the symbols used to show the places identified by you.

2. The above map, taken from the internet (Google Earth) indicates the location of a school. If you have internet facilities in your school, get the map of your school and describe its location.

For Free Distribution

»

»

10

Figure 1.7Several places with various weather conditions

Weather Conditions of the Immediate Surroundings of the School

Weather conditions found in various environments may vary from each other. Accordingly, there may be weather conditions such as warm, dry, rainy, windy and misty.

The objective of this lesson is to guide you to observe the weather conditions of the immediate surroundings of your school.

The weather condition found in a particular place may differ from the weather condition of another place. Although we identify different weather conditions in various places, they may change during the day. The reason for this is, that the nature of weather is not always the same. You can understand that the nature of the

For Free Distribution»

»

11

During the last 24 hours ending at 9 a.m. today, the maximum rainfall of 200 mm was reported from Katunayaka, while the maximum temperature of 30oC was reported from Trincomalee. The minimum temperature of 12oC was reported from Nuwara Eliya. There will be heavy rains in the West, South and western slopes of the central hills during the next 24 hours due to South Western winds.

1. Name the weather elements presented in this weather report.

2. What is the maximum rainfall in millimetres according to that report?

3. Write the places where maximum and minimum temperatures have been reported.

4. Name the direction of the wind that blows into the country.

5. What is the weather forecast revealed by the weather report?

Find weather reports presented by different media and present them to the class and discuss about them.

morning environment gradually changes, by the diffrences that you feel as well as by your observations of the surroundings. See figure 1.7.

The condition of the atmosphere that prevails for a short period of time in a particular area is called weather.

Change of weather conditions according to time and place is its nature. The weather report telecast daily after the news on television reveals information about weather changes in different places. Study the following weather report carefully.

Activities

Assignment

When observing the environment, the things that you feel and see such as temperature, rainfall andwind are called elements of weather.

For Free Distribution

»

»

12

Figure 1.8 Thermometer

1. Record the daily temperature of a specific place selected at the school premises using the thermometer in the laboratory.You can record them for a period of a week or month.

2. Write three sentences about the changes of temperature that have taken place according to the record you prepared.

Temperature

² Temperature is the main element of weather. ² The sun provides temperature and heat. ² Using a thermometer, we can measure temperature. Temperature is measured by units of Celsius and Fahrenheit degrees. ² Dry weather conditions occur when there is extreme solar heat and temperature.

The Department of Meteorology is located at Bauddhaloka Mawatha, Colombo and there are many regional meteorological centres throughout the island connected to it.

The Department of Meteorology prepares the weather report on the basis of data, collected daily about the weather elements from various centres. At present, there are advanced equipment to measure the weather elements. Find out whether there is such a centre located in the immediate surroundings of your school.

You too can make some equipment in the classroom to measure weather conditions. Using those equipment, observe the nature of the weather in the immediate surroundings of your school and understand the differences.

Assignments

For Free Distribution»

»

13

Figure 1.9Rain Gauge

Figure 1.10The Process of precipitation

Rainfall (Precipitation)

²Water that is in oceans, on land and in plants turn into vapour due to the heat of the sun. ²This water vapour rises up in the atmosphere.Then it cools and condenses. ²Clouds are formed with the condensation of water vapour. We receive rain through this process. ²We can measure rain using a rain gauge. Rain is measured in millimetres.

Precipitation

Surface runoff

Evaporation

Snow and ice

Condensation

Transpiration(evaporation from plants)

For Free Distribution

»

»

14

Figure 1.11Wind Direction Indicator andAnemometer

Make a rain gauge with the instructions of your teacher.

² Take a transparent, cylindrical plastic bottle with a flat bottom and remove 1/3 of it from the upper part. ² Place the part that has been removed upside down as a funnel, on the other part of the bottle. ² Paste a strip of paper marked with millimetres on the bottom part of the bottle and cover it with a cello tape. ² Keep it in an open space at a higher level in the garden of your school / home. Measure the rainfall in your area daily and keep records. ² Write three sentences about the rainfall in the relevant area observing the records you kept.

1.Write three benefits we obtain from rain.

2.Prepare a table to show the features that occur in the environment before and after a rain.Assignment

Activities

Wind

² When you observe the environment, you can see moving leaves and branches of trees.You can also feel the cold. ² It happens as a result of the blowing wind. ² The branches of trees bend in the direction of wind. ² The wind that blows at a higher speed is called a storm. The wind that blows with a lesser speed is called a breeze. ² The wind direction indicator shows the direction of the wind. ² The anemometer is used to measure the speed of wind. ² It is measured in kilometres per hour.

For Free Distribution»

»

15

• You can enjoy the cool breeze near oceans, rivers, streams and r eservoirs.

I. Make a wind direction indicator with the guidance of your teacher.

II. Keep it in an open place in your school garden and observe how the direction of the wind changes.

Figure 1.12Clouds of various shapes

Assignment

Clouds

² When you observe the sky, you can see clouds of different shapes and colours. (figure 1.12) ² You can see the nature of clouds when you observe them. ² Before rain, you can see thick dark clouds in the sky. ² When there are no clouds, the sky is clear and blue.

According to the above information, you can collect data related to weather in the immediate surroundings of your school using different types of equipment and observations.

The weather elements, the equipment and the units used to measure them are shown in table 1.1. Study them well.

For Free Distribution

»

»

16

According to your teacher’s instructions, prepare a report about the weather conditions in the immediate surroundings of your home/school, using the data on weather gathered using equipment and by observation.

UnitEquipmentWeather elementDegrees of Celsius/ Fahrenheit

Millimetres

Kilometres Per Hour

Direction shown by the arrow

-

Thermometer

Rain Gauge

Anemometer

Wind Direction Indicator

By observation

Temperature

Rainfall

Speed of wind

Direction of wind

Clouds

Assignment

Table1.1Weather Elements, Equipment and Units of Measurement

With the knowledge about the weather,

² You can plan your day to day activities properly. ² Damages to life and property can be prevented as information about the areas with threats of cyclones, floods and land slides as well as periods of lightning and thunder are informed beforehand. ² Fishermen and farmers will be able to engage in their activities successfully. Activities

1. Write five advantages of knowing the weather conditions in your immediate surroundings.

2.If unfavourable weather conditions prevail in your area, discuss with your teacher and present your views as to how they may affect human activities.

3.Fill in the following cross-word puzzle with the help of the given clues.

For Free Distribution»

»

17

Across

1. You can get to know about the nature of the clouds by doing this.

4. A main weather element.

5. Condensed water vapour falls to the earth as this.

Down.

3.The speed of the wind is measured with this equipment.

2. The wind that blows mildly and softly.

5

231

R

BA

4 T

O

Pay your attention to the weather forecast presented on television or on any other media during a week and be alert to see whether there are changes of weather occurring as stated by media. Keep records of them.

Assignment

Landscape of the Immediate Surroundings of the School (Sketch Map)

The landscape of the immediate surroundings of the school constitutes various geographical features. They can be categorized as natural features and man made features.

For Free Distribution

»

»

18

Categorize the geographical features given in the box into natural and man-made features.

Figure 1.13Landscape of the immediate surroundings of a school

1. Name the geographical features you can identify in figure 1.13.

2. Write five sentences about the landscape of the school according to the figure.

Geographical Features ² Highlands ² Gardens ² Buildings ² Streams ² Cultivated lands ² Forests ² Roads ² Rivers ² Playgrounds ² Low lands

Activity

Activities

The immediate surroundings of your school may be urban or rural. Schools are located in various environments such as mountainous, coastal, cultivated areas and areas close to rivers and tanks.

Figure 1.3 shows a landscape of the immediate surroundings of a school.

For Free Distribution»

»

19

1. Using internet facilities or photographs, obtain the pictures of the landscapes of two urban and two rural schools.

2. Observe those landscapes and write three differences you can identify.

Figure 1.14The sketch map of the landscape of the school

Activities

The sketch map of the landscape of the school is shown in figure 1.14.

There is a clear difference between the picture and the sketch map. ² Some features in the picture are shown three dimensionally. ² Those features in the map are shown as plain figures. ² Shape, distance and location of geographical features can be shown clearly in a map than in a picture.

School

Mountains

road

Houses

Houses

Paddy fieldsPad dy fi elds

Main road

Bridge

Minor road

Minor road

River

N

For Free Distribution

»

»

20

Glossary

² Location - msysàu - Aø©Âh®

² Administrative Division - mßmd,k fldÜGdih - {ºÁõP¨ ¤›Ä ² Province - m<d; - ©õPõn® ² District - Èia;%slalh - ©õÁmh® ² Divisional Secretariat Division - m%dfoaYSh f,alï fldÜGdih - ¤µ÷u\ ö\¯»õÍº ¤›Ä ² Grama Niladhari Division - .%du ks,Odß fldÜGdih - Qµõ© ÷\ÁPº ¤›Ä ² Plan - o< ie,eiau - vmh¨£h® ² Direction - ÈYdj - vø\ ² Compass - ud,sud hka;%h - vø\¯ÔP¸Â ² Internet - wka;¾cd,h - Cøn¯® ² Weather - ld,.=Kh - ÁõÛø»

Draw a sketch map of the landscape surrounding your school similar to figure 1.4. Consider the facts given below.

Facts to be considered when drawing the map,

² Observe the landscape of the immediate surroundings of your school. ² Note down the locations and the features of the mountains, rivers, streams, roads, cultivated lands and public buildings on a paper. ² After that, use colours and create a picture of the landscape. ² Draw the sketch map of the landscape according to the picture. ² When drawing the map, include specific features of the landscape ( Rivers, streams, roads, etc.). ² Use symbols that are easy to indicate the information on the map. ² Indicate the North of the map. ² Consider the shape, size of the features of the landscape and the distance when drawing the map. ² Include a key in the map in order to make it easy to identify the features.

Assignment

For Free Distribution»

»

21

² Mist - óÿu - £Û ² Solar heat - iQ¾h;dmh - öÁ¨£® ² Temperature - WIaK;ajh - öÁ¨£{ø» ² Rainfall - j¾Idm;kh - ©øÇÃÌa] ² Water vapour - c,jdIam - }µõÂ ² Evaporation - jdIamSlrKh - BÂ¯õuÀ ² Condensation - >kSNjkh - Jk[SuÀ ² Winds - iq<x - PõØÖ ² Cyclones - iq<s iq<x - `ÓõÁÎ ² Mild winds - uo iq<x - ö©ßPõØÖ ² Storm - iev iq<x - Pk[PõØÖ ² Clouds - j,dl=`M - •QÀ ² Thermometer - WIaK;ajudkh - öÁ¨£©õÛ ² Rain Gauge - j¾Idudkh - ©øÇ©õÛ ² Wind direction indicator - iq<x ÈYd o¾Ylh - PõØÖ vø\UPõmi ² Anemometer - wks,udkh - PõØÖ Âø\©õÛ ² Wind speed - iq<f`.a fõ.h - PõØÔß ÷ÁP® ² Landscape - N+ o¾Ykh - {»UPõm] ² Geographical features - N+f.da,Sh ,laIK - ¦Â°¯À A®\[PÒ

²Three dimension - ;%sudK iajrEmh - •¨£›©õn® ²Transpiration - W;aiafõokh - _Áõ]zuÀ ²Precipitation - j¾IKh - ©øÇÃÌa] ²Surface runoff - u;=msg .,dhdu - PÈÄ }÷µõmh®

^wmOdjh&

For Free Distribution

»

»

22

The building in which you live with your parents and other family members is called the house. Most probably, your house may be located in an urban, estate or a rural environment with physical features such as highlands, coastal belts, plains or lowlands, slopes, rivers and forests.

Figure 2.1Houses located in different environments

Nature of the Land in the Immediate Surroundings of the House

The objective of this chapter is to study the nature of the land, plant and animal diversity and the activities of the community in the immediate surroundings of your house.

Observe the houses located in different environments in figure 2.1.

2

For Free Distribution»

»

23

Study the figure 2.1 and do the following activity.

1. Match the number of the picture with the caption given below and write the correct number in the relevant box provided. 1. The house located in a rural environment. 2. The house located in a coastal environment. 3. The house located in an estate environment. 4. The house located on a highland. 5. The house located on a plain. 6. The house located on a slope. 7. The house located in an urban environment. 8. The house located in a slightly hilly land.

2. Write the features of the lands in which those houses are located and write the advantages and the disadvantages of those features in the following grid.

Nature of the land in which the houses are located

Features Advantages Disadvantages

3. Observe the nature of the immediate surroundings of your house and mention the features you see.

1. Select a group of students from your class. Find information about the nature of the land of the immediate surroundings of their houses and identify the variety of lands.

NamePlainsCoastal areasHighlandsAreas with slopesKamal

2. Discuss the advantages and the disadvantages of living in such an environment and present them to the class.

Activities

Assignments

For Free Distribution

»

»

24

isjqre fydrd

Figure 2.2Migrant Birds

Wherever your house is located, it is your duty and responsibility to protect the land. Even when beautifying the environment around the house, it should be done carefully. The land should not be misused.

Plant and Animal Diversity

Due to plant and animal diversity, different environments are created in the immediate surroundings of the house. Diverse kinds of plants and animals exist in various eco-systems in Sri Lanka because of the nature of land and climatic conditions. Plants are very useful for the existence of living beings. If you are living in a rural environment, you may find plants in abundance. Eventhough you live in an urban environment, you can beautify the immediate surroundings of your house by growing plants. When selecting plants, you should consider not only their beauty but also whether they are suitable for the environment and the health of the man.

The species of animals that live facing the challenges of the hot sun, rain, threats from enemies and diseases are also a part of our environment. Animal community is also important for the existence of man.You may have noticed some special kinds of birds in the environment of your house during certain periods of the year. Some species of birds are found only in a particular period. The singing of the koha bird or the Asian koel during the season of the Sinhala and Tamil New Year is familiar to you.

Sometimes, we see some birds migrating to our country during the winter season as they are unable to bear the coldness there. Those birds are migrant birds. Indian Pitta, Paradise fly catcher (Sudu Redi Hora) and Sivuru Hora are examples for migrant birds.

For Free Distribution»

»

25

Figure 2.3 shows the benefits we gain from plants and animals and their different effects on the environment.

Contribution for na tural beauty

Purification of the atmosphere

P roviding food a nd habitats for animals

Supply of timber for manufacturing furniture

Making the environment cool

Giving shade Providing fuel

Supply of t imber for t he construction of bui ldings

Providing food and medicine

Figure 2.3 Effects and uses of plants and animals in the environment

Crow-pheasant - destroys snails that harm the crops.

Termite - Breaks down the waste material and helps decaying.

Earthworm - c ontributes to loosen the soil and to enrich it.

Bat - Helps in the propagation of seeds.

Dragonfly - Destroys insects that harm paddy fields.

Crow - Eats waste material.

Parrot - Adds beauty to the environment.

For Free Distribution

»

»

26

1. Enter the names of animals and plants you find in the immediate surroundings of your house in the following table.

AnimalsPlants

2. Put a ' √ ' in the relevant cage in the following table to identify the uses of the above plants. Several uses can also be obtained from the same plant.

Uses of plantsKind of plantFoodMedicine Making furnitureOrnamentsOther

3. Write three uses that man, animal and the environment can obtain from each plant.

4. Classify the animals you find in these pictures, under the categories given in the following table.

1. Insects that help pollination.2. Animals that spread diseases to man.3. Nocturnal animals.4. Poisonous reptiles that harm man.

Activities

For Free Distribution»

»

27

5. Complete the cross-word puzzle with the help of the clues given.

1. Beautify the environment.

2. A poisonous snake.

3. A migratory bird.

4. Spreads diseases such as Dengue and Malaria.

5. Helps to enrich soil.

6. A reptile that is protected by law.

7. Forecasts the weather.

8. Spreads a disease called plague.

9. Helps paddy cultivation and brings an income to the house hold.

10. Destroys snails that harm crops.

1B3I2C

8R

9C

10C

7F6M

5E

4M

P

For Free Distribution

»

»

28

Figure 2.4Various religious symbols and religious institutions

1.Contribute to protect the environment by growing plants in the immediate surroundings of your school/ house.

2.Take steps to grow various kinds of plants in your home garden or in the school garden on special days like your birthday, New Year day or on the National Tree Planting Day.

Assignment

Human Activities in the Immediate Surroundings of Your School / House

Identification of the Community in the Immediate Surroundings of Your School /House

There may be families in your community that belong to various ethnic groups and religious groups. They may be Sinhala, Tamil, Muslim, Burgher or Malay. They may follow different religions such as Buddhism, Hinduism, Catholicism and Islam. There are traditions and rituals linked to those ethnic and religious groups. Although there are many differences, they are your neighbours. Therefore, we should learn to live with them in co-operation.For example working with unity in sports activities, in various associations and in welfare activities without considering the ethnicity and the religion.

For Free Distribution»

»

29

1. Study figure 2.4 and identify the religions shown in those pictures. Complete the following table including the festivals related to those religions.

ReligionsReligious festivalseg :- BuddhismWesak, Poson

2. Mention the ethnic groups in the area where your home is located and their religions.3. Give three examples to show that you work in co-operation with your neighbours during national and religious festivals.4. Name three associations or clubs established for the development of the community in your area. Mention two activities done by each.5. Draw a picture of an occasion where the communities of your area work together to develop the area.

Draw a picture depicting festivals of ethnic and religious groups and display it in your classroom.

Assignment

Activities

Economic Activities of the People in the Immediate Surroundings of Your School

Economic activities of the area depend on the resources found in the area. Among them agricultural, industrial and service sectors play a major role.

Agricultural Activities

Fishing industry, livestock farming and cultivation of crops are carried out under land utilization in different parts of Sri Lanka. Various parts of our country consist of different topographical and climatic features. Accordingly, specific agricultural activities are conducted in those areas. See figure 2.5.

For Free Distribution

»

»

30

Figure 2.5 Specific agricultural activities particular to different areas and crops cultivated

For Free Distribution»

»

31

People in your area may have cultivated various crops according to the nature of the land. For example, cultivation of coconut on the plains, paddy cultivation in river valleys, tea and rubber cultivation in hilly areas.

If your area is located close to a sea, a river, a reservoir or a tank, fisheriesindustry may be the main occupation of people. Similarly, there may be some people who engage in livestock farming like rearing of cattle, pigs or poultry as their occupation.

Name the crops cultivated in the immediate surroundings of your school/ home and the animals reared for livestock farming.

1. Write the names of the cultivated crops and the crops that can be cultivated in your home garden and school garden in the following table.

2. Write three instances where you can contribute to the cultivation of crops in your home garden or your school garden.

Activity

Assignment

Cultivated

Crops

GrainsYamsVegetablesFruitsOther

Crops that can be cultivated

Industrial Activities

Apart from the agricultural industry, there may be industries which use raw materials found in your area. For example, the furniture available in your home may be the products of the timber found in the immediate surroundings of your home. There could also be pots, tiles

For Free Distribution

»

»

32

Figure 2.6Industries based on resources found in the area

and bricks made using clay and flower pots and bricks produced using cement.

In most of the areas, various industries are carried out using the natural resources found in that area. Small scale domestic industries are also spread all over Sri Lanka. Production of sweet meats, products related to rice flour, sewing garments and coir products are examples for those industries.

There are places which are famous for industries based on traditional technological skills in our country. See Table 2.1.

IndustryAreaFurnitureMasksBrasswareCane productsMats

MoratuwaAmbalangodaPilimathalawaRadawadunnaDumbara

Table 2.1

Industries based on traditional technological skills

For Free Distribution»

»

33

Map 2.1Location of several industries based on traditional technological skills

1. Name three industries established in your area. Mention the benefits your area has received from them.

2. Match and re-arrange the information given in Table.2.2 to indicate the location of each industry according to the area, district and the province.

Activities

For Free Distribution

»

»

34

Complete the following table with the industries that can be conducted based on the natural resources available in your area.

Natural resourcesIndustry

Table 2.2Industry AreaProvinceDistrict

MasksBrasswareMats Tiles and Bricks

PilimathalawaAmbalangodaBangadeniyaDumbara

SouthernCentralNorth Western

GalleKandyPuttalam

Assignment

Services

There are many economic activities found in the immediate surroundings of your school and home. The services provided by the institutions are also important. There are services such as health, education, postal, transport, banking and security in your area as well as in other areas. Several such services are shown in figure 2.7.

Some of these services are provided by the government free of charge and some are provided by the private sector.

There are services provided by the government at a concessionary price too. Issuing season tickets in transportation and providing medicines at a concessionary price at ‘Osu Sala’ are examples.

For Free Distribution»

»

35

Figure 2.7Various services

1.Write down different services you find in your area and mention two activities carried out by each of them.

2.Write three services you enjoy as a school student.

3.Write down your duties towards the country as you enjoy those services.

These services are important for the people in the area to maintain their day to day living.

Some people in your area may be engaged in providing these services. If they are engaged in agricultural, industrial sectors or providing a service utilizing their manual labour, they render a great social service. Similarly, people who are engaged in various professions contribute in many ways that are possible for them to build the society.

Activities

For Free Distribution

»

»

36

Glossary

² Environment - mßirh - `ÇÀ

²Nature of the land - N+ñfha iajNdjh - {»zvß C¯À¦ ²Observation - ksÍlaIKh - AÁuõÛzuÀ

²Human environment - udkqI mßirh - ©Ûu `ÇÀ ²Physical environment - fN!;sl mßirh - ö£ÍvPa `ÇÀ ²Plant diversity - Ydl úúO;ajh - uõÁµ £ÀÁøPø© ²Animal diversity - i;a;aj úúO;ajh - Â»[S¨ £ÀÁøPø© ²Community - m%cdj - \‰P® ²Coastal belt - fjr< ;Sr - Pøµ÷¯õµ® ²Plains - ;eks;,d - \©öÁÎ

²Slopes - nEjqï - \õ´ÄPÒ ²Mountainous lands - l÷lr ìï - E¯º {»® ² System - moaO;sh - öuõSv

²Climatic effects - foaY.=‚l n,mEï - Põ»{ø»z uõUP[PÒ

²Organisms - Ôùka - A[Q ²Rural environment - .%dóh mßirh - Qµõ©a `ÇÀ ² Urban environment - kd.ßl mßirh - |Pµa `ÇÀ ²Animal community - i;a;aj m%cdj - Â»[Sa \‰P®

²Migrant birds - ixpdrl mlaISka - Ch®ö£¯º £ÓøÁPÒ

²Birds species - l=re¨ úfYAI - £ÓøÁPÎß CÚ[PÒ ² Atmosphere - jdhqf.da,h - ÁÎ©sh»®

²Waste - wmøjH - PÈÄ

²Seeds - îc - Âøu ²Insects - lDóka - §a]PÒ ²Pollination - mrd.Kh - ©Pµ¢u® ²Reptiles - Wr.hska - FºÁÚ ² Natural beauty - iajdNdúl fi!kao¾hh - C¯ØøP AÇS

² Soil conservation - mdxY= ixrlaIKh - ©m£õxPõ¨¦

²Coexistence - iyÔjkh - \P ãÁÚ®

For Free Distribution»

»

37

²Ethnic group - ckj¾. - CÚ¨¤›Ä

²Occupation - Ôjfkdamdh - öuõÈÀ ²Economic activities - wd¾Ól lghq;= - ö£õ¸Íõuõµ |hÁiUøPPÒ ²Agricultural activities - lDIsld¾ñl lghq;= - ÂÁ\õ¯ |hÁiUøPPÒ ²River valley - .x ñáhdj; - |v¨ £ÒÍzuõUS ²Wet zone - f;;a l,dmh - DµÁ»¯® ²Dry zone - úh<s l,dmh - E»º Á»¯® ²Intermediate zone - w;rueÈ l,dmh - CøhÁ»¯®

²Informal - wúêu;a - •øÓ\õµõu

²Raw materials - wuqøjH - ‰»¨ö£õ¸mPÒ ²Technological skills - Ys,am ×kh - Pø»bõÚ® öuõÈÀ~m£®

For Free Distribution38

Figure 3.1Land resource and its utilization

It is essential to maintain the immediate surroundings of one’s home well to lead a healthy life. The basic components of the immediate natural surroundings of your home are land, water, soil, plants, animals and the atmosphere. When man develops his knowledge, his influence towards the basic components of the environment too increases. As a result of this, there may be various problems arising in the immediate surroundings of your home. Therefore, it is your duty to contribute to the conservation of the environment, by keeping the immediate surroundings of your home in a healthy condition.

The main objective of this chapter is the identification of the basic natural components of your immediate surroundings and to give you an understanding about the proper maintenance of it.Land

Figure 3.1 shows how the land which is a basic component of the environment, is utilized in various ways.

Good Maintenance of the Immediate Surroundings of Your Home

3

39For Free Distribution

You can maintain the immediate surroundings of your home/school well, if you prepare the home garden and school garden according to a plan and use them properly.

Pay regular attention to the following facts regarding the proper use of land

² Find the places where soil erosion occurs and grow cover crops, build stone ledges or make drains. ² Cover the land with chaff, coir dust or straw. ² Dig a compost pit and make fertilizer with kitchen waste and dry leaves.

When the available resources are utilized in the immediate surroundings of your school/home, various changes may occur in the environment. Therefore, you must be careful to do those changes in a manner which will not harm the environment.

Figure 3.2 Utilization of land in a proper manner

1. Select a portion of the land of your home or school and prepare a plan to use it in a proper manner.

2. Implement the plan with the advice of your teacher.

Assignment

For Free Distribution40

Destruction of the eco systemSoil erosion Destruction of animal habitats

FloodsLandslides

Shortage of drinking water, Droughts

² Expansion of agricultural lands on a mass scale. ² Cultivation on mountain slopes. ² Excessive use of agro-chemicals. ² Extraction of clay to make tiles and bricks. ² Unlimited sand mining in rivers. ² Mining limestone. ² Irregular gem mining.

Figure 3.3Improper use of lands and its effects

Figure 3.3 indicates how land is used in an improper manner and its effects.

Irregular use of land

41For Free Distribution

1. Mention different ways of using the land in the immediate surroundings of your home.

2. Mention three harmful effects of the use of land in that place and suggest steps that can be taken to minimize them.

Water

Water is a natural resource which is essential for the existence of living beings. Water is used for various purposes. Figure 3.4 indicates instances where water is used for different purposes.

Figure 3.4Various occasions where water is used

Activities

For Free Distribution42

Figure 3.5Occasions where water is used in an improper manner

1. Observe figure 3.4 and mention the occasions where water is used.

2.Mention the sources from which your householders obtain water to fulfil their needs.

3.State the occasions of water wastage with examples.

Figure 3.5 indicates ways of using water in an improper manner. Accordingly, various problems may occur due to water wastage.

Activities

43For Free Distribution

01. Observe figure 3.6 and write three ways that cause water pollution.

02. Mention three harmful effects of water pollution.

03. Present four strategies that could be used to prevent water pollution.

04. Write two steps that could be taken to prevent improper use of water.

The problems arising with water shortageMethods of water conservation

² Shortage of pure drinking water. ² Threat for the existence of living beings. ² Failure of agricultural and industrial activities. ² Spread of diseases. ² Soil infertility. ² Failure in generating hydro electricity.

² Prevention of misuse and wastage of water. ² Consideration given to careful use of water. ² Prevention of polluting drinking water. ² Protection of the forest cover and motivation to plant trees. ² Conservation of water resources and prevention of water pollution. ² Making people aware of the importance of water conservation. ² Using waste water in domestic use for other purposes. ² Training people to use rain water tanks.

Table 3.1

The problems of water shortage and methods of water conservation

Activities

For Free Distribution44

Figure 3.6Occasions of water pollution in the immediate surroundings

Figure 3.6 shows the occasions where water gets polluted due to various human activities.

Air

Air, as well as water, is an important factor for our survival. Among the gases in the atmosphere, both oxygen and nitrogen are important. Oxygen is required for breathing and nitrogen is needed for the growth of plants. The air around us gets polluted due to various human activities. Look at figure 3.7. Accordingly, the results of air pollution affect man as well as animals and plants in a harmful manner.

Water Pollution

45For Free Distribution

Figure 3.7Occasions of air pollution

01. Observe figure 3.7 and name the instances where air pollution occur.02. Mention the difficulties you have to undergo when you breathe polluted air.

Air Pollution

Activities

For Free Distribution46

01. Complete the following table with the information related to human activities that cause pollution of land, water and air in the immediate surroundings of your home and school.

Components of the natural environment

Irregular human activities Effects of these activities

Steps that could be taken to minimize damage/pollutionLand

Water

Air02. Design posters on the theme “Prevention of pollution of air, water, land and conserving them” and display them in the school premises.

Assignments

Effects of Air Pollution

Two harmful effects due to air pollution are mentioned below.

1. Diseases related to the respiratory system.

²Cough ²Lung cancer ²Catarrh2. Occurrence of acid rains. ²Water pollution. ²Destruction of aquatic organisms.

²Destruction of forests. ²Damage to soil.

²Asthma ²Severe headache

Energy

We use various sources of energy to fulfil different needs, from the moment we wake up in the morning. Accordingly, energy helps us to fulfil various tasks like preparation of food, cleaning, for the use of communication devices, lighting up and transportation. The sun is the basic source of all the energy sources we use.

47For Free Distribution

In ancient times, man used his manual power but later, he got the support of animals to do various activities. Man and animals get strength to do these activities from food. Machinery obtains the necessary power from fuel, electricity or from other sources.

Reasons for the increasing demand for energy

² Increase in population. ² Increase in consumer needs. ² Progress in the industrial activities. ² Development of transportation. ² Improvement of living standards.

Hydro-electricity, mineral oil, natural gas, solar power (solar cells) and firewood are the energy sources that can be used for various household purposes. You should utilize them efficiently, systematically and economically when fulfilling the needs at home.

When you use power at home,

² Switch on the bulbs only at the necessary place and time. ² Use more efficient electric bulbs like CFL, (Compact Fluorescent Lamp) and LED (Light Emitting Diode). ² Do not keep the door of the refrigerator opened for long. The number of times it is opened should also be limited. ² Iron all the necessary clothes whenever possible at one time. ² Use firewood-hearths that do not waste heat. ² After cooking, switch off the cooker or put out the hearth (firewood hearth). ² When using the gas cooker, use specific utensils suitable for the task. ² When using vehicles, plan and attend several tasks during a single journey for the economical use of fuel.

For Free Distribution48

Figure 3.8 Different types of energy sources and occasions where they are used

Activities

01. Write the instances where energy sources shown in figure 3.8 are used.

02. Name the energy sources used in your home.

03. Mention two occasions of energy wastage.

Figure 3.8 indicates different occasions where different types of energy sources are used.

49For Free Distribution

The light we get from a bulb of 60W is provided by a CFL bulb of 11W produced according to the accurate standard. We can save the power of 245W if we use five CFL bulbs of 11W instead of using five 60W bulbs.

The light we get from a bulb of 100W can be obtained from a LED bulb of 9W produced according to the accurate standard.

Figure 3.9Compact Florescent Lamp (CFL bulb)

Figure 3.10Light Emitting Diode (LED bulb)

Figure 3.11An efficient firewood hearth

The efficient firewood hearth helps to cook fast, easily and safely with the use of less firewood.

W

bulb of 60W

W

ulb of 11W

he accurate

f

he power of

f

FL bulbs of

60W bulbs.

Figure 3 9

Bio-gas is known as an important alternative source of power which is used for energy needs. Figure 3.12 indicates a bio-gas unit prepared for domestic consumption of energy with a systematic management of waste material. The kitchen waste, plants like salvinia, monochoria, gliricidiawhich are found in the immediate surroundings of your home and small pieces of hay, liquid cow dung can be used for this purpose.

Economical use of energy sources

For Free Distribution50

Figure 3.12A bio-gas unit and its benefits

You can fulfil the energy needs of your house by obtaining solar power through solar cells which absorb solar energy. Although it costs high, solar power does not cause environmental damages when compared to other energy sources.

The efficient firewood hearth is used to cook meals quickly. You can get electricity needed for your home from this bio-gas unit. The waste that is removed from time to time too can be used as a rich manure for the vegetable plots in the home garden.

51For Free Distribution

Figure 3.13 A Solar PanelActivities

1.Read the following statements. Mark the correct statements with a tick (√) and the wrong statements with a cross (x) in the relevant box.

01. Bio-gas can be generated using waste material.

02. Although we can obtain light to our houses

from bio-gas, we cannot use it for cooking.

03. It is not suitable to put the waste matter removed

from the bio-gas unit into the vegetable plots in the

home garden.

04. Using one switch to light many bulbs is a way of

conserving electricity.

05. Using Fluorescent Lamps (CFL) is a way to

reduce the electricity bill.

06. We can get petrol, diesel, as well as gas from crude oil.

For Free Distribution52

2. Name the alternative energy sources that can be used to provide power for electric bulbs, TV and the hearth.

3.Mention three methods which can be applied by you and your family members to save electricity in your home.Assignment

Use the table above and note down the occasions of using electricity in your home in the above table. Use the data collected and answer the following questions. 1. What is the electric appliance that is used most in your home? 2. Write the names of electrical appliances used for the longest period of time according to the order.3. According to your note, what are the other factors you can present about the use of electrical appliances ?

Time3.30 pm – 6.00 pm 6.00 pm – 9.00 pm9.00 pm – 10.00 pm

DayMondayTuesday

ThursdayFridaySaturdaySunday

Number of lighted electric bulbs

Number of lighted electric bulbs

Number of lighted electric bulbs

Duration for which the TV set was switched on

Duration for which the TV set was switched on

Duration for which the TV set was switched on

Duration for which the electric fan was used

Duration for which the electric fan was used

Duration for which the electric fan was used

Period during which the equipment were used for preparation of food

Period during which the equipment were used for preparation of food

Period during which the equipment were used for preparation of food

Period during which the electric iron was used

Period during which the electric iron was used

Period during which the electric iron was used

Wednesday

53For Free Distribution

Disposal of Waste Materials

Many things are disposed from our homes as well as from the immediate surroundings of home and school. These discarded things are called waste material. These waste material can be grouped as domestic, agricultural and industrial wastes according to their origin. Usually, we collect this waste material in a certain place in the home garden or put them into a pit or add them into a heap of garbage. Yet, the disposal of non-decaying waste material in this manner is harmful to the environment. The disposal of waste material has become a problem in the urban environment due to over population and limited space. The improper disposal of waste material causes pollution of air, water and land in the immediate surroundings of your home. Therefore, we have to pay attention to prevent the damages that occur with these activities. For this, ² Reuse - Reusing the items that can be used again and again. Example - Textbooks, Packing boxes (like ice-cream containers), glass bottles etc. ² Recycling - Recycling the non - degradable materials like polythene and plastic. An extra income can be earned by collecting, sorting and handing them over to recycling centres or collecting centres and recycled materials are used to produce new products. ² Reducing - Minimizing the use of non- degradable items. Example- Polythene packing, plastic items etc... ² Making different items using discarded waste material. Coconut shells – spoons and curios

Electric bulbs – lamps

Pieces of cloth – door mats, cushion covers ² Preparation of a bio-gas unit / compost pit using kitchen waste, agro waste and dried leaves.

4. What are the other types of energy sources used in your home?

5. What are your suggestions to save electricity at home?

For Free Distribution54

Activities

1. Prepare a list of waste material disposed from the immediate surroundings of your home. Categorize them according to the following table.

Domestic wasteAgro- wasteIndustrial waste

2. Group them as degradable and non-degradable waste material.

Figure 3.14Proper disposal of waste materials

² Reduction of food waste by preparing the food in sufficient quantities and to cater to the appetite. It also helps to maintain the family budget in a better way. ² Proper disposal of waste material.

55For Free Distribution

Glossary

² Mineral resources - Lksc iïm;a - PÛ¯ ÁÍ[PÒ

²Conservation - ixrlaIKh - ÷£oU £õxPõzuÀ

² Drought - ksh`.h - Áµm]

² Floods - .xj;=r - öÁÒÍ¨ö£¸USPÒ

² Soil erosion - mdxY= Ldokh - ©sn›¨¦

² Air pollution - jdhq ¥IKh - ÁÎ©õ\øhuÀ

² Acid rains - wï, jeis - Aª»©øÇ

² Energy - n,Yla;sh - \Uv

²Communication - ikaksfõokh - öuõhº£õhÀ

² Solar power - iQ¾h Yla;sh - `›¯\Uv

² Solar cells - iQ¾h fldaI - `›¯ P»[PÒ

²Energy sources - n,Yla;s m%Nj - \Uv ‰»õuõµ[PÒ

² Bio Gas Unit - Ôj jdhq tAllh - E°›¯À Áõ²¨ £Sv Recycling - m%;spl%SlrK - «Ò _ÇØ]

² Agricultural lands - lDIs ìï - ÂÁ\õ¯ {»[PÒ

² Water consumption - c, mßfNdackh - }›ß ~PºÄ

²Sustainability - ;srir meje;au - {ø»÷£s

²Forest cover - jk jeiau - Põmk¨÷£õºøÁ

² Alternative energy - úl,am n,Yla;s - £v½mk \Uv

²Compact Fluorescent Light - m%ixys; m%;s§ma; úÿ,s

myka - Pa]u©õÚ JÎ²ÒÍ ªßSªÌ

²Light Emitting Diode - wdf,dal úfudapl vfhdavh - JÎ¸® öÁ¨£ ªßÚÝUP¸Â

Prepare a compost pit collecting the degradable waste material discarded from home and home garden and make use of the manure for house plants.

Assignment

3. Mention the ways of earning an extra income by using them.

4. Suggest the actions that can be taken to minimize the amount of waste material collected in the environment.

For Free Distribution

»

»

56

Sri Lanka is an island situated in the Indian Ocean to the south of India. It belongs to the continent of Asia, the largest continent in the world. Sri Lanka is separated from India by a narrow strip of sea. This strip of sea is 32 km in width and it is called the Palk Strait.

Map 4.1Location of Sri Lanka as an island close to India

The main objective of this chapter is to provide an understanding of the location of Sri Lanka and the various influences caused due to its location.

Sri Lanka consists of its typical climatic, economic and cultural features due to its separate location in proximity to India. (Map 4.1)

Location of Sri Lanka

4

For Free Distribution»

»

57

How the location of Sri Lanka influences the climate

² Due to its location as an island, Sri Lanka receives rainfall throughout the year and the temperature is moderated as a result of the wind blowing across the Indian Ocean. ² Increase in temperature in the northern part of Sri Lanka is due to the influence of the dry winds that blow from the Indian sub-continent. ² Occurrence of rainfall due to the influence of monsoons.

How the location of Sri Lanka influences the economy

² Development as a centre in the East-West naval route since ancient times. ² Importance of the harbours of Sri Lanka in international trade. ² Development of the tourist industry due to the location of attractive places. ² Emergence of new economic patterns with the arrival of western nations.

How the location of Sri Lanka influences the culture

² Presence of various languages, religions and ethnic groups due to the mixture of different groups of people. For example, from India and Arabia. ² With the arrival of western nations, various cultural features of them were added to the society.

Study the map 4.3 and fill in the blanks with the correct words selected from brackets.

(Bengal, Indian, Mannar, Palk, Asian)

1. Sri Lanka belongs to the ………….. continent, the largest continent in the world.

Activities

For Free Distribution

»

»

58

Relative location of Sri Lanka

Identification of a country in relation to the location of surrounding countries, continents, seas and oceans is called the relative location.

Accordingly, Sri Lanka is located,

² to the South of the Asian continent. ² towards the North of the Indian ocean. ² to the West of South-East Asia and ² to the East of the African continent. (refer map 4.2)

2. Bay of …………… is located between Sri Lanka and India.

3. Sri Lanka is separated from India by …………strait.

4. Sri Lanka is located in the …………….. Ocean.

5. The sea area located in the North-East of Sri Lanka is called the bay of ……….

Map 4.2Relative Location of Sri Lanka

For Free Distribution»

»

59

Observe the above facts with the help of the globe in your school and also with reference to an Atlas.

Map 4.3Location of Sri Lanka in the world map

Mention the changes that occurred in the society due to the location of Sri Lanka in close proximity to India.

Activity

Activity

Important Places Located in Sri Lanka

At present, Sri Lanka is a rapidly developing country in South Asia. The progress in the social and economic sectors is the reason for this. Some outstanding development projects have contributed towards this progress.

² Building new harbours, new airports and expressways ² Urban development

The following map indicates a few economically, socially and culturally important places of Sri Lanka.

For Free Distribution

»

»

60

Map 4.4 Important places in Sri Lanka

For Free Distribution»

»

61

1. Mark and name the following places on an outline map of Sri Lanka. • The international airports at Katunayaka and Mattala. • The harbours at Colombo, Trincomalee, Galle and Hambantota. • The cities; Galle, Badulla, Ratnapura, Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Kurunegala, Jaffna, Kandy and Colombo.2. Write a short description on the topic “Rapidly Developing Sri Lanka”.

Activities

Other Islands in the World

There are many islands located in the world with various extents of land. Map 4.6 indicates a few such islands and the land area.

Figure 4.1Southern expressway

Map 4.5Colombo - Matara, Colombo - Katunayake expressways

Source - Road Development Authority 07/02/2014

For Free Distribution

»

»

62

Sri Lanka65610km2

Madagascar587713km2

Sicily25662km2

Greenland2130800km2

Taiwan35883km2

Cuba104556km2

Map 4.6Several islands in the world and their land area

Source - http://en.wikipedia.org /21/07/2014

For Free Distribution»

»

63

1. Identify the islands in map 4.6 and mark and label them on a world map.

2. Sequence the islands according to the extent of the land area. Mention the area of land in front of each island.

Complete the following table with the help of the Textbook and an Atlas.

Name of the islandThe ocean in which it is locatedJapanNew ZealandMaldives IcelandUnited KingdomSeychelles

Assignment

Activities