==== BLOCKS ==== 

For free distribution25

2.1 Introduction of business and businessman 2.2 Needs and wants 2.3 Characteristics of businesses 2.4 Similarities of a businessman and an entrepreneur 2.5 Differences between a businessman and an entrepreneur 2.6 Types of entrepreneurs Business entrepreneurs Social entrepreneurs Internal entrepreneurs

2

This chapter discusses the following facts.

The mutual relationship between entrepreneurship and businesses

For free distribution26

Activity 01

You can check your knowledge on entrepreneurship and business by answering the following checklist. Mark "  '' in the columns given below as "agree" ''do not agree" or " not sure".

Serial No.StatementAgree Do not agree Not sure1There is a risk in involving in business activities.

2Employees in organisations too can carry out their activities as entrepreneurs.

3Human needs are fulfilled through innovations created by entrepreneurs.

4Human needs are fulfilled by the consumption of goods and services.

5Business people can also be considered as entrepreneurs.

6Business activities are carried out with a profit motive.

7 A feature of business is transactions.

8We can do business activities even without a profit motive.

9 Function of a business is to sell goods and services produced by entrepreneurs.

10Businesses do not provide services free of charge.

Check whether your answers are correct or incorrect after studying this chapter.

For free distribution27

2.1 Introduction of business and businessman

It is not necessary to explain about businesses.That is because we deal with businesses all the time. Think of goods and services we consume to fulfill our day to day needs and wants in the following contexts.

Example :-

Wash yourself in the morning

Have a cup of tea

Prepare daily meals

Watch television

Get ready to go to school or to work

We need to consume a variety of goods and services for the above activities. Think about the complexity of processes from producing goods and services by different institutions and people to fulfil human needs. All the production and distribution of goods and services are done by businesses. Now we can identify what businesses are.

Business refers to all the activities related to production and distribution of goods and services to fulfil human needs and wants. The people who carry out these activities are called businessmen.

2.2 Needs and Wants

The basic things which are essential in order to live are known as needs. The various ways by which the needs are fulfilled are called wants. Each want is created on a need. Accordingly, needs are fulfilled by satisfying wants.

For free distribution28

Differences between needs and wants

NeedsWantsBasically required

Limited

Common to all

Occur with birth

Arise after the needs.

There are lots of wants to fulfill one particular need.

Vary according to the personality of each person.

Entrepreneurs and businessmen create wants according to the requirements of people.

You need to understand the goods and services related to the needs and wants which you have already learnt. Anything which fulfills human needs and wants is called goods and services.

Identify some specific characteristics of goods and services by studying the following table.

GoodsServices

Tangible and exist physically

Storable

Can preserve the homogeneity.

Consumer is not essential for the production process.

Can separate from the supplier

Intangible and do not exist physically.

Non-storable

Cannot preserve homogeneity. Differ according to the supplier and the context.

Most of the time, consumer is a part of the production process.

Cannot separate from the supplier.

For free distribution29

Activity 02

Observe the following pictures.

Complete the following table using the above pictures. An example is given to you.

NeedItems which can fulfil the need.(some needs can be fulfilled even by one item.)1 Food2 House3 Dress4 Security 5 Education6 Leisure7 Communication

a loaf of bread, a glass of milk............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................

For free distribution30

2.3 Characteristics of business

Let us examine some features of businesses to improve your knowledge on businesses.

There is a risk

There may be a profit as well as a loss in business activities. Businesses will have to face these uncertainties.

Transactions are based on price

The value is expressed in terms of price when buying and selling of goods.

An economic activity

This is considered as an economic activity because limited resources are used for the production of goods and services, and transactions are carried out based on price.

Continuous transactions

Transactions in a business never end with one or few but continue.

There are businesses with profit motive and non profit motive as well.

Carry out the transactions using resources

Every business involves in the activity of production or purchase and sale of goods and services.

Explanation

Characteristics

There is an objective

For free distribution31

2.4 Similarities of a businessman and an entrepreneur

Business activities are carried out by both businessmen and entrepreneurs. Following similarities exist between them.

Y Carry out an economic activity

Y Face a risk

Y Carryout transactions

Y Use resources Y Make decisions on production, purchasing and selling of goods and services Y Face competition.

Y Think of survival

Y Self motivation

2.5 Differences between a businessman and an entrepreneur

All businessmen are not entrepreneurs. Likewise all entrepreneurs are not businessmen. Study the following venn diagram.

Figure 2.3

Non Entrepreneurs entrepreneurial who are not businessmen businessmen

Entrepreneurial Businessmen

How an entrepreneur and a businessman differ from each other is presented below. Try to understand the different characteristics clearly.

Figure 2.2

Figure 2.1

For free distribution32

BusinessmanEntrepreneur

Carries out business activities in a traditional and conventional method.

Example :- Most of the traditional retail shops

Carries out business activities based on new products and considering the realities and changes in the environment.

Example :-

Super markets

Doesn't like to face or take risks.

Example :- Doesn't like to extend the business

Accepts risks which can be bearable after a careful calculation of risks.

Example :-

Extends the business through new investments, enters new markets

Doesn't like to face competition.

Example :-

Doesn't like opening new business by other people Scared of imported items

Seeks for competition.

Example :-

Takes competition as a challenge

Doesn't take maximum advantage from existing resources.

Example :-

Minimum use of buildings, motor vehicles, tools and equipments and raw materials

Takes maximum use of the existing resources, as per required.

Example :-

Maximum use of available resources Creates by-products from waste

For free distribution33

Tries to solve problems in a conventional way.

Example :-

Sells goods when customers come Sells only the goods and services which are available at the moment

Solves problems creatively.

Example :- Finds customers and sells goods at their doorstep. Produces goods and services suitable for the hidden requirements of customers

Setting short term objectives.

Example :- Tries to sell goods some way or the other to earn a quick profit

Setting long term and visionary objectives.

Example :-

Long term survival in the market tries to bring the customers back to the business

Be Satisfied by keeping the business in the same way.

Example :-

Pavement business Traditional retail business

Extends the business day by day, is not satisfied of the present position.

Example :-

Looks for new markets and becomes an exporter

As a whole, according to the information given above, entrepreneurs have more ability than a businessman or a trader to become more successful.

2.6 Types of entrepreneurs

We can identify three types of entrepreneurs.

Business Entrepreneurs

These are the traders or businessmen who involve in business activities with the motives of earning profits.

Example :- Retail trading businessman

For free distribution34

Social Entrepreneurs

Social entrepreneurs are those who submit or show creative solutions for social problems.

Today, the society faces a lot of problems. Spread of epidemic diseases, problems of nutrition, problems of illiteracy, use of drugs, and poverty are some of them. People who endeavour to solve these problems creatively are known as social entrepreneurs.

Example :- Grameen loan system Introduction of activities related to eradication of epidemic diseases. Social entrepreneurs attempt to transform the society by proposing various solutions to these social issues. These can be seen implemented provincially, nationally and internationally. There are number of world famous entrepreneurs.

Example :- Mahatma Gandhi, Marie Curie, Prof. Mohomad Yoonus. Nationally, we have a number of popular social entrepreneurs.

Example :- Dr. C.W.W. Kannangara

Internal (institutional) Entrepreneurs

A recent attention has been focused on the type of people called internal entrepreneurs. These entrepreneurs can be seen among the existing employees in the business.

Internal entrepreneurs are those who hold top level jobs within the business with entrepreneurial skills. These people make changes on their own as examples to others.

Example :- Heads of government institutions who have won awards for quality. Principals of schools who have won awards for productivity.

For free distribution35

Activity 03

State some of your needs and various ways by which you fulfil those needs.

Needs Goods/ Services you use The way it is fulfilled

What type of an entrepreneur would you like to become in the future? Explain with reasons.

1. Business entrepreneur

2. Social entrepreneur

3. Internal entrepreneur

Activity 04

List out the businesses with businesses and entrepreneurial characteristics in your environment.

Activity 05

For free distribution36

01. Define needs and wants.

02. How do goods differ from services?

03. Write 03 differences between needs and wants.

04. Write 05 characteristics of businesses.

05. Compare and contrast a businessman and an entrepreneur.

06. Name 03 types of entrepreneurs and give two examples for each type.

Let us write answers.