==== BLOCKS ==== 

34For free distribution

lET's talk

04

Talk to your friend.

- Have you ever faced an interview? When ? Where ?- What are different situations where interviews are held?

Activity 01

Speaking

Find someone who …Walk round the class talking to your friends and the teacher.

1.) Find someone who … - grows vegetables for family consumption - has more than two siblings - collects foreign stamps as a hobby - has never climbed a tree - knows the names of all the teachers in the school - has been to a forest - has read more than 20 story books

2.) Find someone whose … - best friend’s name begins with ‘ U ’ - favourite game is volleyball - house is situated near a lake/ tank / river/sea - ambition is to be a scientist - hobby is reading adventure stories Now present you findings to the class.

35For free distribution

Activity 02

Listening and Writing

Shakthi is a boy of your age. He is interviewed to test his English language proficiency. Listen to the dialogue and fill in the data sheet given in the Workbook (Unit 4 Activity 2).

Activity 03

WritingIn the dialogue, you heard the examiner ask different kinds of questions to test Shakthi's language proficiency.

• List out the question words you heard in the dialogue.• Now write two questions using each of those question words.

Activity 04

Speaking

Interview your friend to find out his future plans.

You may ask the following questions.

• What are you going to do after you leave school?• What is your ambition?• How are you going to serve the country?

Your friend may respond using the following phrases.

• I have planned to / would like to……………after leaving school.• I wish to be / I am going to be/ I would like to be.....…• By becoming a ………………, I can / will be able to……………

36For free distribution

Activity 05

Group work

You have been asked to submit an article to a newspaper. You have decided to write a detailed description of the principal / English teacher /one of the teachers of your school. First make a list of questions you would ask him / her to collect necessary information such as; - background, family and education - likes and dislikes - achievements Then interview the person you have selected.The mind map you prepared in the workbook will help you.

Activity 06

The following is the picture that the examiner gave to Shakthi during the interview.

This is how shakthi began to describe the picture.

This is a picture of a busy city. There are...........Now complete the description as shakthi would have done.

37For free distribution

Activity 07

Role Play

Read aloud the following telephone conversation.

A : Hello, good afternoon! ABC Company. How can I help you? B : I’m Muralitharan from Galle. I am speaking regarding the advertisement published in the Sunday Star. A : Please hold on. I’ll put you through to the HR department.C : Hello, good afternoon! Can I help you?B : Hello, I am speaking regarding the advertisement published in the Sunday Star. I’m interested in working for your company. How can I get an appointment for an interview?C : Sir, we maintain a database of the candidates and based on the qualifications, we call for interviews. Would you like to submit your details to the database?B : Is it confidential?C : Absolutely, sir. May I know your name?B : Sivakumaran Muralitharan. M-u-r-a-l-i-t-h-a-r-a-n. I want to apply for the post of Assistant Accountant.C : Please tell me why you have decided to join our company.B : ABC is a reputed company and my qualification match the requirements given in the advertisement. If I am selected, I think I can be an asset to the company given my qualifications and experience.C : Can you please tell me the highest educational qualification you possess?B : I’m an undergraduate of the University of Ruhuna. This is my final year in Bachelor of Commerce. C : Sir, any professional qualifications ? B : Well, I am following the Advanced Certificate in Accounting step 2. I got through step 1 with two distinctions and one credit pass.C : That’s fine sir. Can you please give me your contact number, e-mail address and your permanent address?

38For free distribution

B :You can contact me on 076- 2223346 and my e-mail is murali@tmail.comC : Can you please spell it for me sir?B : m-u-r-a-l-i @tmail.com. And my postal address is 34/5, Lake View, Galle.C : Thank you sir. I have entered the details into the database. If you are selected for an interview, we will let you know in advance. You are expected to bring the originals of your certificates along with photocopies. B : Thank you. I expect a favourable reply. C : Thank you for calling, sir. Have a nice day!

Activity 08

Design a data collection form for the database the company maintains. Get into groups of four. While three group members are role playing the dialogue, the reporter should fill the form by listening to them.

Activity 09

Read the conversation and answer the questions.

1. Who are the three characters A, B and C?2. What is the post that Mr. Muralitharan is applying for?3. What are the professional qualifications that he possesses?4. What is the use of maintaining a database?5. Will Mr. Muralitharan get a chance to face the interview? Support your answer.

Activity 10

Read the following conversation. Identify the function of the underlined phrases, expand and write them in your writing book. Follow the example.

A : I love to play cricket.B : (1) So do I. Did you watch the cricket match between Sri Lanka and South Africa last night?A : No, (2)I didn't. I had some work to do at home. B : Sri Lanka won the match, and I am so happy about thier performance.A : Really?(3) So am I. By the way, have you done the homework?B : No,(4) I haven't. I watched the match and didn't have time to do it.A : Then, you must do it before the teacher comes.B : Yes, (5)I have to.e.g.: (1) So do I - I love to play cricket, too

39For free distribution

Activity 11

Writing

Shakthi : Look, Shashika I have bought a new camera.Shashika : Wow! It's so cool. How much did you pay for it?Shakthi : It cost me an arm and a leg for it.

The underlined phrase is an idiom. It means that Shakthi's new camera was very expensive.

Find the meanings of the idioms in column A from column B.

A B

● let the cat out of the bag an unbelievable tale ● once in a blue moon two or more people agree to something ● see eye to eye happens very rarely● sit on the fence completely (in love)● cock and bull story when someone doesn't want to choose or make a decision● head over heels to share information that was previously concealed

Activity 12

Read the following dialogue.

Gayan : How long have you been preparing for your campaign, Vignesh? Vignesh : By the end of this month, it will be one year.Gayan : One year? And do you think you will have launched it by the end of June?Vignesh : I hope so. I suppose we will have made all the posters and videos by then.Gayan : Why has it taken you so long?Vignesh : We needed a lot of data to support our arguments. And we'll have to sort them out, but we'll have finished it by the end of June.Gayan : I wish you all good luck, Vignesh. And I hope that before your campaign ends, the public transport in our city will have changed for the better.

40For free distribution

Fill in the missing utterances using the future perfect tense.

build.........................

finish.........................buy.........................

Learning Point

The Future Perfect Tense

We use ‘will have + done’ to say that something will have already be finished by a certain point of time in the future as used in the situation in Activity 12.

NowFuture

Activity 13

Now write five sentences about your hopes and aspirations using the above tense. Example: I will have sat the O/L examination by the end of December next year.

41For free distribution

Activity 14

Read aloud the groups of words given below paying special attention to the letters in red. Pick the words in which the letters in red are silent (not pronounced). Complete the grid “Silent Letters” given in the workbook. (Unit 4. Activity 10)

● castle, sachet, bright, soften, attitude, robot● walk, yield, could, failure, solemn, behalf● couple, pneumonia, cupboard, hypnotise, receipt● honour, rehearsal, exhibition, behalf, halt● knot, kite, knowledge, skate, risk, knife● foreign, ignorance, campaign, guard, argument

Read aloud and enjoy!

Tongue twisters ● Greek grapes, Greek grapes, Greek grapes...● There those thousand thinkers were thinking how the other three thieves went through.● Whatever the weather, whether it is hot or cold, we have to put up with the weather, whether we like it or not.